REVIEW ARTICLE
Family ﬁrm internationalization: Past
research and an agenda for the future
Jean-Luc Arregle1,
Francesco Chirico2,3,
Liena Kano4, Sumit K. Kundu5,
Antonio Majocchi6 and
William S. Schulze7
1EM Lyon Business School, E´cully, France;
2Macquarie Business School, Macquarie
University, North Ryde, Australia; 3Centre for
Family Entrepreneurship and Ownership (CeFEO),
Jonkoping International Business School,
Jonkoping University, Jo¨nko¨ping, Sweden;
4Haskayne School of Business, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Canada; 5Department of
International Business, College of Business, Florida
International University, Miami, USA;
6Dipartimento di impresa e management, Luiss
Guido Carli, Rome, Italy; 7David Eccles School of
Business, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA
Correspondence:
J.L. Arregle, EM Lyon Business School, E´cully,
France
e-mail: arregle@em-lyon.com
Abstract
Although
the
study
of
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
has
generated
considerable scholarly attention, existing research has offered varied and at
times incompatible ﬁndings on how family ownership and management shape
internationalization.
To
improve
our
understanding
of
family
ﬁrm
internationalization, we systematically review 220 conceptual and empirical
studies published over the past three decades, structuring our comprehensive
overview of this ﬁeld according to seven core international business (IB)
themes. We assess the literature and propose directions for future research by
developing an integrative framework of family ﬁrm internationalization that
links IB theory with conceptual perspectives used in the reviewed body of work.
We propose a research agenda that advocates a cross-disciplinary, multi-
theoretic, and cross-level approach to studying family ﬁrm internationalization.
We conclude that family ﬁrm internationalization research has the potential to
contribute valuable insights to IB scholarship by increasing attention to
conceptual
and
methodological
issues,
including
micro-level
affective
motivations, background social institutions, temporal perspectives, and multi-
level analyses.
Journal of International Business Studies (2021) 52, 1159–1198.
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41267-021-00425-2
Keywords: systematic review; family ﬁrm internationalization; international business
theory
INTRODUCTION
Family ﬁrms dominate the business landscape. They employ about
60% of the global workforce and generate over half of the world’s
gross domestic product (GDP) (Family Firm Institute, 2017). Yet,
family ﬁrms are not only important domestic producers: they are
also prominent in international business (IB). The Economist (2015)
predicts that the share of large multinational businesses owned or
controlled by families will increase from about 15% to 40% by
2025. This trend is evident in Europe, where family companies like
Ferrero and Michelin are important international players; in North
America, with such companies as Walmart and Johnson & John-
son; in Australia, with Hancock Prospecting and Visy Industries;
and in Asia, where examples include Hutchison Whampoa of Hong
Kong, the Salim Group of Indonesia, and the Tata Group of India.
The online version of this article is available Open Access
Supplementary Information
The on-
line version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1057/s41267-
021-00425-2.
Received: 31 January 2020
Revised: 28 February 2021
Accepted: 4 March 2021
Online publication date: 14 June 2021
Journal of International Business Studies (2021) 52, 1159–1198
ª The Author(s) All rights reserved 0047-2506/21
www.jibs.net

Although the prominence of family enterprise in
the world economy has captured the interests of
scholars across a variety of disciplines, IB scholars
have been slow to embrace family business inter-
nationalization as a research ﬁeld. In recent years, a
broad consensus has emerged that family ﬁrms’
singular governance features shape their interna-
tionalization behavior. This potential uniqueness
of family business internationalization has driven
increased scholarly activity in this realm (Alayo,
Iturralde,
Maseda,
&
Aparicio,
2020;
Debellis,
Rondi, Plakoyiannaki, & De Massis, 2020b). Yet,
IB scholars focus on traditional IB topics and
assume that the inﬂuence of the controlling family
on ﬁrm conduct is relatively homogeneous (Pukall
& Calabro`, 2014). Meanwhile, family business
scholars focus on family-driven phenomena and
rarely explore questions motivated by IB theory.
Moreover, existing research is highly heteroge-
neous, characterized by varied and often contrast-
ing conceptual perspectives and deﬁnitions, and by
diverse and incompatible measures (Arregle, Duran,
Hitt, & van Essen, 2017). As a result, scholars
struggle to access relevant research about how
family
ownership
and
management
shape
internationalization.
Extant reviews of family ﬁrms’ internationaliza-
tion predominantly address the family business
audience
(e.g.,
Alayo
et
al.,
2020;
Casillas
&
Moreno-Mene´ndez,
2017;
Kontinen
&
Ojala,
2010; Pukall & Calabro`, 2014), explore the evolu-
tion of the family ﬁrm internationalization litera-
ture (Debellis, De Massis, Petruzzelli, Frattini, & Del
Giudice, 2020a), or focus on speciﬁc facets of
family ﬁrm internationalization such as the inter-
nationalization process (e.g., Metsola, Leppa¨aho,
Paavilainen-Ma¨ntyma¨ki, & Plakoyiannaki, 2020)
and family SME internationalization (e.g., Lahiri,
Mukherjee,
&
Peng,
2020). None
speciﬁcally
addresses the broad disciplinary needs of the IB
audience.1 To accomplish this task, we offer a
comprehensive
review
and
assessment
of
the
emerging ﬁeld of international family business
from an IB perspective. We review 220 conceptual
and empirical articles on family business interna-
tionalization published in international academic
journals through 2020. We organize and present
these studies using IB themes – elements of inter-
national strategy that are common to most IB
frameworks, and related to decisions about ‘‘the
what, the where, and the how of internationaliza-
tion’’ (Dunning & Kundu, 1995: 101). Hence, this
review is IB-oriented but phenomenon-driven, and
summarizes and articulates the theories used to
understand internationalization in the context of
family ﬁrms. Context has been a key element of IB
research (Buckley & Lessard, 2005). In fact, atten-
tion to speciﬁc contexts (e.g., emerging/transition
economies, see Buckley, Doh, & Benischke, 2017;
Hennart, 2012; Meyer & Peng, 2016; historical
context, see Verbeke & Kano, 2015) has allowed
researchers to reﬁne and better understand the
sensitivity of IB theories to their context. The
family ﬁrm context has such potential.
After discussing our methodology in this review,
we offer an overview of the family ﬁrm deﬁnitions
employed in the reviewed studies. We then provide
a comprehensive overview of the studies on family
ﬁrm internationalization, organized according to
seven key IB themes. We assess the literature,
propose research opportunities, and discuss impli-
cations for both family ﬁrm internationalization
and IB research as a whole. We believe that greater
integration of IB concepts with the family ﬁrm
internationalization literature, along with a stron-
ger emphasis on the multilevel conceptual and
empirical structure of family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion, will enrich the IB discipline while helping
family ﬁrm scholars reconcile the many contradic-
tions and conﬂicting perspectives found in this
literature.
METHODOLOGY
Family ﬁrm internationalization is an emerging
ﬁeld of research, with contributions dispersed in
multiple journals across different academic disci-
plines. Because the ﬁeld is young and diverse, we
chose to offer a systematic review of all relevant
contributions (and not just those published in top-
tier academic journals), starting with the very ﬁrst
academic
articles
published
about
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
(i.e.,
Donckels & Fro¨hlich,
1991;
Gallo
&
Sveen,
1991).
Accordingly,
we
surveyed all academic journals with relevant arti-
cles on the topics of internationalization and/or
family ﬁrms (Hoskisson, Chirico, Zyung, & Gam-
beta, 2017; Wan, Hoskisson, Short, & Yiu, 2011) for
the period 1991 to 2020.2 We maintain that an
inclusive approach is well suited for this emerging
academic ﬁeld, which, in its early years, lacked a
constituency. Perhaps as a result of low interest, the
topic was, at least initially, neglected by the top-tier
journals, causing many early important contribu-
tions to ﬁnd homes in less prestigious journals.3
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1160
Journal of International Business Studies

We followed an established systematic review
methodology, Preferred Reporting Items for Sys-
tematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis Protocols (or
PRISMA-P) (Shamseer et al., 2014) to execute our
study. Speciﬁc steps undertaken include: (1) iden-
tifying the scope of the review (temporal bound-
aries and sources); (2) selecting keywords and
conducting literature search; (3) screening identi-
ﬁed studies for inclusion in the review; (4) assessing
and coding studies; and (5) synthetizing ﬁndings
and writing up the analysis. We detail these steps
below.
We conducted a systematic search (Tranﬁeld,
Denyer, & Smart, 2003) using keywords related to
family ﬁrms and internationalization on ﬁve major
electronic databases, including both discipline-
speciﬁc (ABI/Inform database) and interdisciplinary
databases (EBSCO database, Google Scholar, ISI
Web of Knowledge, and Scopus).4 The initial search
yielded 297 articles. Each identiﬁed paper was
screened separately by at least two of the authors
and an academic external to the authors’ team to
ensure that it met our criterion for relevance. We
eliminated 77 articles that casually mentioned
family business or internationalization or did not
speciﬁcally
explore
family
governance
and/or
dimensions of IB as dependent or independent
variables. The resulting 220 articles are reported in
Appendix 1. For each article, we report key infor-
mation,
including
source,
theoretical
frame,
methodology, sample, family ﬁrm deﬁnition, key
variables, and ﬁndings. Consistent with our claim
that this is an emergent ﬁeld, the majority (65%) of
articles listed in Appendix 1 were published in the
last 7 years.
We coded our 220 articles according to theories
employed, research questions, and major topics of
investigation. Then, we iteratively cross-referenced
these articles with major IB-centric research ques-
tions related to the ‘what, where, and how’s’ of
internationalization (Dunning, 1993; Dunning &
Kundu, 1995). The iterative process yielded seven
categories that play a central role in IB studies: (1)
scale (or depth) of internationalization; (2) scope
(or breadth) of internationalization; (3) interna-
tional entry mode choice5; (4) international loca-
tion choice; (5) internationalization process; (6)
timing, or pace and rhythm of internationalization;
and (7) internationalization performance. These
seven categories, henceforth IB themes, encompass
core phenomena addressed in the reviewed studies,
but also represent key aspects of family ﬁrm
internationalization decisions and outcomes (De
Massis, Frattini, Majocchi, & Piscitello, 2018), as
well as research themes that cut broadly across
most IB frameworks (Verbeke, 2013).
We structured our review using these IB themes
as our organizational frame. Three themes (scale,
scope, and performance) represent outcomes of
internationalization. The remaining four themes
(entry mode, location choice, internationalization
process, and timing) encompass the range of inter-
nationalization decisions and actions taken by
family ﬁrms. Within each IB theme, we evaluate
the extent to which scholarly consensus about the
inﬂuence of family on internationalization exists,
highlight theoretical contributions, and identify
knowledge gaps and directions for future research.
We also explore the host of methodological issues
that have limited the development of theory about
family ﬁrm internationalization and propose solu-
tions. The results of this detailed analysis are
presented in the following sections. We begin by
discussing family ﬁrm deﬁnitions and their impli-
cations
for
family
ﬁrm internationalization
research.
FAMILY FIRM DEFINITIONS
Deﬁnitions of family ﬁrms differ widely across the
literatures in family business (Chua, Chrisman, &
Sharma, 1999), management (Anderson & Reeb,
2003; Schulze, Lubaktin, Dino, & Buchholtz, 2001)
and IB (Arregle et al., 2017; Hennart, Majocchi, &
Forlani, 2019). Many studies assert that family
ownership is the deﬁning proxy (e.g., Carr &
Bateman, 2009), whereas others suggest that family
ﬁrms must have substantial levels of family owner-
ship and involvement in ﬁrm management to
satisfy the criterion (e.g., Alayo, Maseda, Iturralde,
& Arzubiaga, 2019). Other studies differentiate
between family-controlled ﬁrms (those over which
families have unilateral control due to their level of
ownership and managerial oversight) and family-
inﬂuenced ﬁrms (over which family owners and
managers have much less control) (Chua et al.,
1999; Sirmon, Arregle, Hitt, & Webb, 2008). Finally,
some researchers contend that emotions, social
relationships, and intergenerational succession –
that is, the family’s intent to pass ownership of the
business to the next generation – are the deﬁning
attributes of the family ﬁrm that should be inte-
grated into family ﬁrm deﬁnitions (Salvato, Chir-
ico, Melin, & Seidl, 2019).
The deﬁnition of the family ﬁrm matters because
it
identiﬁes
characteristics
that
exert
varying
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1161
Journal of International Business Studies

inﬂuence on internationalization. Characteristics
like ownership and managerial involvement are
inﬂuential, because family ﬁrms occupy a distinc-
tive social and institutional position within the
economy. The family, along with the Church,
State, and educational system, is one of the funda-
mental social institutions (Calori, Lubatkin, Very,
& Veiga, 1997; Whitley, 1992). As such, the family
imprints
collective
knowledge
on
individuals
(Calori et al., 1997; Whitley, 1992) and exerts a
mimetic and normative inﬂuence on family ﬁrm
conduct (Arregle, Hitt, & Mari, 2019). Thus, the
family imposes a set of institutional constraints
upon the family ﬁrm and its managers (Arregle
et al., 2007). Moreover, historically, family ﬁrms
have shaped the social, legal, political, and ﬁnan-
cial institutions that support them (Soleimanof,
Rutherford, & Webb, 2018). Institutional forces
thus both constrain and enable family ﬁrm con-
duct, and inﬂuence different internationalization
outcomes. As we will show, differing family ﬁrm
deﬁnitions partially account for inconsistent and
conﬂicting results. Accordingly, we indicate in
Appendix 1 the deﬁnition of family ﬁrms used in
each reviewed paper. Table 1 summarizes the main
distinguishing characteristics of family ﬁrms, and
their related meanings and effects on organiza-
tions, namely: 1) family inﬂuence or control; 2)
emotional attachment and identiﬁcation; 3) dis-
tinctive social capital; 4) transgenerational intent;
and 5) generational involvement.
LITERATURE REVIEW ON FAMILY FIRM
INTERNATIONALIZATION
In this section, we synthetize family ﬁrm interna-
tionalization studies that address each of seven core
IB themes: (1) scale of family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion (39% of studies); (2) scope of internationaliza-
tion
(8%);
(3)
entry
mode
choice
(18%);
(4)
international location choice (3%); (5) internation-
alization process (16%); (6) pace and rhythm of
internationalization (4%); and (7) internationaliza-
tion
performance
(12%)6. We summarize
core
ﬁndings and identify conﬂicts and the sources of
inconsistencies across studies in Table 2, and
discuss as follows.
Explaining Family Firms’ International Scale
The majority of extant research contends that
unique features of family ﬁrms inﬂuence their
international scale. However, there is no consensus
about which of these features, alone or in tandem,
facilitate or constrain internationalization (Arregle
et al., 2017). For example, in a study of interna-
tional orientation in the world’s top family ﬁrms,
Carr and Bateman (2009) conclude that family
ﬁrms are more internationally oriented than non-
family ﬁrms, whereas Go´mez-Mejı´a, Makri, and
Larraza Kintana (2010) reach the opposite conclu-
sion. The effect of owner–management is a partic-
ularly contentious issue. For example, stewardship
scholars (Davis, Schoorman, & Donaldson, 1997)
suggest that family owner–managers’ strong iden-
tiﬁcation with the ﬁrm, and their commitment to
the long-run welfare of the ﬁrm and its employees,
motivate them to act in the best interest of the ﬁrm,
even when presented with challenges and risks.
Stewardship thus helps explain the positive inﬂu-
ence of family ownership and management on a
family
ﬁrm’s
international
scale
(James,
1999;
Singh & Gaur, 2013; Zahra, 2003). In contrast,
agency theory scholars (e.g., Santulli, Torchia,
Calabro`, & Gallucci, 2019) argue that the many
private beneﬁts of owner–management give major-
ity family owners incentive to prioritize control of
their ﬁrms (Faccio, Lang, & Young, 2001). Because
the complexity of international operations often
requires that ﬁrms delegate authority in ways that
reduce control (Alessandri, Cerrato, & Eddleston,
2018), family owners are less likely to internation-
alize. Van Essen, Carney, Gedajlovic, and Heugens
(2015) also conclude that family ﬁrms are less
internationally oriented, attributing this fact to
agency conﬂicts between majority family share-
holders, who are better positioned to reap the
private beneﬁts of control, and minority sharehold-
ers, who stand to beneﬁt from internationalization
and reduced family control. Singla, Veliyath, and
George (2014) provide further evidence that these
agency conﬂicts within family ﬁrms hinder inter-
national scale.
Similar contradictions emerge from studies of
family managers’ risk attitude. Gallo and Pont
(1996) assume that the alignment of owner–man-
ager interest in family ﬁrms reduces agency costs
and promotes the ﬁrms’ willingness to pursue risky
activities such as developing international scale.
However, scholars espousing a socio-emotional
wealth
(SEW)
perspective
argue
that
family
owner–managers prioritize the preservation of fam-
ily’s SEW. SEW comprises ‘‘the nonﬁnancial aspects
of the ﬁrm that meet the family’s affective needs,
such as identity, the ability to exercise family
inﬂuence, and the perpetuation of the family
dynasty’’
(Go´mez-Mejı´a,
Haynes,
Nu´n˜ez-Nickel,
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1162
Journal of International Business Studies

Table 1
Distinguishing characteristics of family ﬁrms
Distinguishing
characteristics of
family ﬁrms
Meanings/facts
Exemplary effects/outcomes
Examples of references in family ﬁrm
literature
Family inﬂuence
or control
A family coalition has a
signiﬁcant presence in
ownership, or ownership and
management.
- Family goals are prioritized.
- Stewardship behavior, agency costs,
altruism.
- Conﬂicts with non-family
stakeholders.
- Minority shareholders exploitation.
- Fast decision making.
…
Anderson and Reeb (2003), Berrone
et al. (2012), Le Breton-Miller, Miller
& Lester (2011), Salvato et al.
(2019), Schulze, Lubatkin, & Dino
(2003).
Emotional
attachment and
identiﬁcation
Family members are strongly
emotionally attached and
identify with the family ﬁrm.
- Family goals are prioritized.
- Departure from proﬁt-maximizing
behavior.
- Stewardship behavior, agency costs,
altruism.
- Preserve the ﬁrm image/reputation.
- Survivability capital.
…
Berrone et al. (2012), Miller and Le
Breton-Miller (2005), Salvato et al.
(2019), Sirmon and Hitt (2003),
Schulze et al. (2003).
Unique social
capital
Family members enjoy strong
levels of internal and external
social capital.
- Deep relationships, trust and shared
values or norms.
- Strong local embeddedness and
relational governance.
- Community citizenship.
- Amoral familism.
- Corporate social responsibility.
…
Arregle et al. (2007), Berrone et al.
(2012), Bird and Wennberg (2014),
Miller and Le Breton-Miller (2005),
Sirmon and Hitt (2003).
Transgenerational
intention
Family members intent to
transfer across generations (the
vision of) the business held by
the dominant family coalition.
- Family goals are prioritized.
- Dynastic succession.
- Nepotism.
- Long term orientation, persistence
and resilience.
- Patient capital.
…
Berrone et al. (2012), Chirico et al.
(2020), Salvato et al. (2019), Sirmon
and Hitt (2003), Zellweger and
Astrachan (2008).
Generational
involvement
The family structure changes
through the passage of time.
- Knowledge accumulation and
diversity.
- Goal (ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial)
divergence.
- Family conﬂicts.
- Entrepreneurial behavior.
…
Kellermanns and Eddleston (2004),
Kotlar and De Massis (2013), Salvato
et al. (2019), Sciascia, Mazzola, &
Chirico, (2013).
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1163
Journal of International Business Studies

Table 2
Explaining family ﬁrm internationalization: summary of core IB themes and main ﬁndings
Core IB theme
Main ﬁndings/perspectives
Sources of contradiction
Comments
International scale
- Family ﬁrms have inherent
resources constraints vis-a`-vis
internationalization (ﬁnancial,
managerial, international
knowledge).
- SEW focus may constrain
internationalization through
increased SEW loss/risk aversion
- Presence of external actors may
create principal-agent conﬂict
and dampen internationalization.
- Concentration of control creates
principal-principal conﬂict which
dampens internationalization
- Stewardship behavior helps
overcome challenges of
internationalization.
- Involving external (non-family)
actors/resources helps close
inherent resource gaps or
limitations for
internationalization.
- Family control streamlines
decision-making vis-a`-vis
internationalization and increases
internationalization level.
- Unique resources (social capital,
reputation, long-term
orientation) facilitate
international scale.
- Family ﬁrms’ ability to achieve
high levels of internationalization
depends on a business model
chosen; family ﬁrms’ unique
features facilitate utilization of
speciﬁc business models (i.e.,
global niche) conducive to
internationalization.
- Individual-level characteristics of
family managers may exacerbate
or ease the inherent constraints.
- A speciﬁc generation (ﬁrst verus
subsequent) may positively or
negatively impact international
scale.
- Macro-level formal and informal
institutions can constrain or
facilitate family ﬁrm international
scale.
- Diverging theoretical starting
points and assumptions (e.g.,
stewardship versus agency
theory).
- The same theory (e.g., social
capital, agency) can explain
positive or negative effects.
- Broad-base comparison of family
versus non-family ﬁrms’
international scale, with diverging
operationalizations of family ﬁrms
and measures of
internationalization.
- Samples may not be
representative (single-country
investigations yield diverging
results).
- Insufﬁcient consideration of
family ﬁrm heterogeneity
- Insufﬁcient consideration of the
different risk proﬁles of
internationalization.
- Narrow focus on isolated sources
of heterogeneity and their
inﬂuence on internationalization.
- Differences in internal and
external context at individual,
family, ﬁrm and macro levels
(e.g., a speciﬁc generation’s
propensity to facilitate versus
constrain internationalization
depends on competencies and
education levels of the
generation; relationships in the
family etc.).
Broad consensus exists that family
ﬁrms possess idiosyncratic features,
and that their resource reservoirs
are unique, impacting international
scale in a unique way. But extant
work diverges on whether these
unique features facilitate versus
constrain internationalization. The
contradiction is particularly
apparent in studies that attempt to
establish a generalized relationship
between family ownership–
management and
internationalization.
The main reason for contradicting
results is the general lack of
contextual considerations, and
insufﬁcient incorporation of
heterogeneity (at all levels, i.e.,
individual, family, ﬁrm, and macro)
into the exploration. Those studies
that explore heterogeneity typically
(although with some exceptions)
focus on a single source of
heterogeneity at a single level of
analysis (e.g., certain institutional
features at a macro level), and
therefore do not necessarily
reconcile the diverging results in a
broad sense.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1164
Journal of International Business Studies

Table 2 (Continued)
Core IB theme
Main ﬁndings/perspectives
Sources of contradiction
Comments
International scope
- Family ownership has a positive
impact on international scope
due to owners’ propensity toward
stewardship behavior
- Family management constrains
internationalization scope due to
risk aversion of owner–managers.
Increasing international scope
inﬂicts higher demands on
resources, requires greater
international experience on the
part of family members, and
increases SEW loss potential.
- Family managers’ social capital is
locally/regionally bound and
lacks diversity, constraining
international scope.
- Strong family social capital
creates close ties between
generations. It sustains the
founder’s imprint on ﬁrm
strategy, limiting international
scope changes and increases.
- Resources brought by external
(i.e., non-family) owners,
managers, and board members
can mitigate the negative impacts
of family governance on
international scope.
- The type of family ﬁrm (family-
controlled or family-inﬂuenced)
matters: Higher % of external
directors or managers have a
negative effect on international
scope in family-controlled ﬁrms,
and a positive effect in family-
inﬂuenced ﬁrms.
- Different deﬁnitions of family
ﬁrms.
- Failure to differentiate between
family ownership, management,
inﬂuence, and control in some
studies.
- Lack of nuanced differentiation
within central constructs (e.g.,
among different types of external
actors, different objectives for the
ﬁrm).
In studies that focus speciﬁcally on
international scope, a greater
degree of consensus exists, with
the majority of studies suggesting
that international scope in family
ﬁrms is lower than in nonfamily
ones.
Diverging results regarding the
effect of external actors on
international scope can be
reconciled by differentiating
among different types of nonfamily
actors: external owners, board
members, and
employees/managers affect
international scope in different
ways; the speciﬁc impacts further
depend on contextual factors such
as governance systems, strategic
objectives, generational
characteristics, etc.
International entry
modes
- High % of family ownership
discourages high commitment
entry modes associated with risks
of committing resources.
- Family ﬁrms tend to gradually
switch from lower to higher
commitment entry modes, e.g.,
from exporting to JV to WOS.
- Cooperative entry modes are
often sought as a means of
lowering risk and accessing host
market knowledge.
- Family ﬁrms tend to seek out
entry modes that grant them
maximum control over
operations.
- Family ﬁrms tend to prefer
greenﬁeld entry to acquisition
- Different theoretical starting
point/assumptions (e.g., agency
theory assumes full rationality; TCE
assumes bounded rationality).
- Inherent risk aversion often
assumed without testing.
- Risk aversion (even if conﬁrmed)
may lead to diverging entry
strategies, for example,
cooperative entry in order to
close resource gaps versus WOS
in order to safeguard against
partner unreliability; speciﬁc
strategies chosen depend on
contextual factors.
- SEW is adopted as a blanket
assumption, however,
internationalization behavior
Many studies are characterized by
assumption-omitted testing,
whereby risk avoidance is assumed
and used as a basis of hypotheses
development, but is not necessarily
tested or conﬁrmed. Further, most
of the differences in results
regarding family ﬁrms’ preferred
foreign entry and operating modes
are due to contextual
characteristics that inﬂuence mode
choices. Many studies explore
these heterogeneous features at
micro (e.g., biases, SEW
preferences, individual’s
experience and capabilities), family
(e.g., the presence or absence of
intra-family conﬂict), ﬁrm (e.g.,
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1165
Journal of International Business Studies

Table 2 (Continued)
Core IB theme
Main ﬁndings/perspectives
Sources of contradiction
Comments
- Acquisition may be preferable at
later stages of
internationalization, while JVs are
more likely upon initial entry.
- Entry mode choice is determined
by a number of contextual
factors, including level of foreign
experience, characteristics of
potential partners (ownership
structure), host country
characteristics (level of
environmental uncertainty,
distance), home and host country
institutions, individual
preferences and biases of owners
(SEW preferences, bifurcation
bias, risk tolerance), types of
assets transferred to host
countries, governance structure,
internationalization motives.
- Ownership structure (family
versus non-family) is not a
signiﬁcant prediction of entry
mode choice.
depends on what dimension of
SEW is prioritized/on speciﬁc
noneconomic goals.
- Contextual differences.
- Differences in sample
characteristics.
international experience,
governance, ownership, resources,
motives) and macro (institutions,
various dimensions of distance,
stability/uncertainty) levels. It
seems that establishing a
generalized relationship between
family ownership–management
and preferred entry modes is a
futile task; rather, a more fruitful
way forward is to investigate
unique drivers of governance
decisions in family ﬁrms, as well as
contextual characteristics that
shape these decisions.
International
location choice
- Higher levels of family ownership
are associated with higher-risk FDI
locations (risk aversion promotes
long-term strategy that increases
the probability of investment in
riskier markets).
- Family ﬁrms tend to favor
culturally proximate host
locations.
There is no de facto preference for
low distance locations.
- Market choices depend on micro-
level factors such as dominant risk
perceptions, presence/absence of
bifurcation bias, personal
preferences/objectives of owners.
- Contextual differences.
- Differences in sample
characteristics.
- Blanket (untested) assumption of
risk aversion, without due
consideration of diverse
outcomes (e.g., risk aversion can
lead to a choice of distant as well
as proximate markets, depending
on strategic objectives).
Similar to the issue of entry mode
choice, it appears that differences
in internal and external contexts
must be considered in order to
explain international location
choices in family ﬁrms. Speciﬁcally,
micro-level characteristics
(cognitive make-ups, personal
objectives, and biases) often
explain diverging results in terms of
family ﬁrms’ location preferences.
Overall, no generalized relationship
can be reasonably established, with
contextual features of family ﬁrms
affecting their location choices.
Internationalization
process
- Family ﬁrms pursue a traditional/
stepwise internationalization
model.
- Under certain conditions, family
ﬁrms internationalize rapidly/
pursue non-traditional
internationalization patterns
(e.g., ﬁrms where stewardship
attitude is weak or moderate).
- Family ﬁrms learn about
international opportunities
through accidental discovery.
- Family ﬁrms can be proactive in
international opportunity
recognition, depending on the
level of their international
- Contextual differences: expansion
patterns are context-speciﬁc.
- The nature of social capital
utilized (existing/narrow versus
new/broad) explains different
patterns in international
opportunity recognition.
Expansion patterns are
idiosyncratic and are shaped by a
number of complex heterogeneous
characteristics at various levels of
analysis. Differences in ﬁndings are
typically explained by
heterogeneous variables linked to
individual family members,
families, ﬁrms or the international
contexts within which the
expansion is undertaken. Most
studies focusing on
internationalization process
attempt to achieve a deeper
understanding of the process and
its determinants, rather than
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1166
Journal of International Business Studies

Table 2 (Continued)
Core IB theme
Main ﬁndings/perspectives
Sources of contradiction
Comments
orientation and the breadth of
social capital.
- Expansion patterns depend on
individual factors (characteristics,
capabilities, attitude), family-
speciﬁc factors (generational
quality and vision, stewardship
attitudes, harmony), ﬁrm-speciﬁc
factors (business models and
strategies, capabilities, internal
governance, quality of networks,
historical origins) and macro-level
factors (home and host country
and global environments/
tensions).
assigning a generalized
internationalization pattern to
family ﬁrms. Such a generalized
relationship cannot reasonably be
established.
Pace and rhythm of
internationalization
- Family ﬁrms internationalize
slowly, following a traditional
stepwise pattern.
- Timing of family ﬁrm
internationalization does not fall
into a distinct pattern.
- Timing of entry depends on stage
of internationalization: there is no
differences between timing of
entry between family and
nonfamily ﬁrms in the initial
exporting stage, but family ﬁrms
enter into the advanced phase of
exporting later than nonfamily
ones.
- Family ownership speeds up the
pace of internationalization, but
negatively affects its rhythm.
- Features impacting pace and
rhythm of internationalization
include: founders’ mindset, ﬁrm
strategy, governance, managerial
practices, succession practices
and generational features,
technological capabilities,
location characteristics.
- Contextual differences: expansion
patterns (including timing) are
context-speciﬁc.
- Different methodologies and
benchmarks/deﬁnitions of ‘speed’
(pace) and ‘rhythm’.
- Differences in features related to
other aspects of
internationalization, e.g., scale
and scope.
Studies that consider
heterogeneous contextual features,
both internal and external, arrive at
nuanced conclusions that
challenge the conventional thesis
that family ﬁrms internationalize
slowly in a gradual/stepwise
fashion. Still, establishing a
generalized pattern for temporal
features of family ﬁrm
internationalization is not possible
without considering nuanced
contextual features. Diverging
results re: the timing, speed and
rhythm of internationalization stem
from contextual differences related
to other aspects of
internationalization: for example,
family ﬁrms with narrow
international scope may pursue
more rapid internationalization
than ﬁrms with greater
international scope.
Internationalization
performance
- Family control negatively impacts
proﬁtability through a negative
impact on internationalization.
- Proportion of family members in
TMTs and international
diversiﬁcation have a joint
- Inconsistent operationalization of
internationalization (scale versus
scope; lack of consideration of
international diversiﬁcation).
- Limited consideration of
internationalization motives (e.g.,
nonﬁnancial objectives of
Most studies investigating
internationalization performance
outcomes focus on ﬁnancial
performance. Establishing a
generalized internationalization-
ﬁnancial performance relationship
is problematic due to diverging
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1167
Journal of International Business Studies

Jacobson, & Moyano-Fuentes, 2007: 106). Go´mez-
Mejı´a et al. (2007) and others (e.g., Chirico, Go´mez-
Mejia, Hellerstedt, Withers, & Nordqvist, 2020)
present
evidence
suggesting
that
family-owner
managers are so averse to the loss or reduction of
SEW that they are willing to forego a certain
amount of proﬁt in order to preserve it. However,
the effects of this loss aversion on family ﬁrm
internationalization are not clear. Go´mez-Mejı´a
et al. (2010: 224) note that ‘‘family ﬁrms are pulled
in two opposite directions’’ by SEW, because inter-
national diversiﬁcation lowers both business risk
(thus helping preserve SEW) and family control
(thus
reducing SEW). However,
Go´mez-Mejı´a
et al.’s empirical results show that, on average,
family involvement is associated with lower inter-
national scale. Other SEW-based studies reach
similar conclusions, both when analyzing interna-
tionalization through export (Banno`
& Trento,
2016; Dou, Jacoby, Li, Su, & Wu, 2019; Kraus,
Mensching, Calabro`, Cheng, & Filser, 2016; Ray,
Mondal, & Ramachandran, 2018) and FDI (Bar-
onchelli, Bettinelli, Del Bosco, & Loane, 2016;
Carney, van Essen, Gedajlovic, & Heugens, 2015).
Table 2 (Continued)
Core IB theme
Main ﬁndings/perspectives
Sources of contradiction
Comments
negative impact on ﬁrm
performance.
- Internationalization enhances
family ﬁrms’ performance.
- Family management positively
moderates the relationship
between internationalization,
innovation, and performance.
- Market value decrease caused by
overseas asset value decrease is
weaker for family ﬁrms than
nonfamily ones.
- The relationship between family
inﬂuence and performance is
contingent on geographic and
cultural distance between home
and host countries.
- Family ﬁrms with family leaders
perform better when
internationalization is home
region-focused; family ﬁrms with
nonfamily leaders perform better
outside of the home regions.
- International performance is
determined by international
entrepreneurship orientation,
managerial routines, and
governance practices.
- Internationalization of family
ﬁrms promotes growth but harms
short-term proﬁtability.
- Family ﬁrm internationalization
promotes CSR.
- The achievement of
internationalization goals hinges
on managerial skills, innovation
capacity, absorptive capacity, and
adaptability.
internationalization) when
operationalizing performance.
- Inconsistent deﬁnition of ﬁnancial
performance; international
performance not isolated.
- Static operationalization of
ﬁnancial performance.
- Inconsistent operationalization of
family ﬁrms (ownership versus
control versus inﬂuence)
- Contextual
differences/contingencies.
deﬁnitions and measures of both
internationalization and
performance, and the fact that the
relationship is moderated by
idiosyncratic ﬁrm-level features.
Introducing the family variable into
the relationship creates further
complications due to inconsistent
deﬁnitions of family ﬁrms, and the
addition of an extra source of
heterogeneity at the family level.
Due to the inherent heterogeneity
of ﬁrms and their internal and
external contexts, tracing a
generalized relationship between
family ﬁrm internationalization and
performance is theoretically and
empirically untenable. A more
nuanced approach is required,
including an in-depth investigation
of moderators and contingencies,
and an inclusion of non-ﬁnancial
performance outcomes. Reviewed
studies investigating non-ﬁnancial
outcomes of family ﬁrm
internationalization focused on
different objectives such as
corporate philanthropy and
inheritance.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1168
Journal of International Business Studies

The literature suggests that a more nuanced
approach to questions concerning the inﬂuence of
speciﬁc attributes on the scale of family ﬁrm
internationalization may help resolve some of
these contradictions. For example, international-
ization requires extensive managerial resources
(Hitt, Bierman, Uhlenbruck, & Shimizu, 2006),
which are frequently lacking in family ﬁrms due
to their heavy reliance on family leadership and,
also, their compensation practices (Neckebrouck,
Schulze & Zellweger, 2018). A series of studies
document that individual-level characteristics of
family managers, such as education and prior
international work experience, positively inﬂuence
international scale (Casillas & Acedo, 2005; Majoc-
chi, D’Angelo, Forlani, & Buck, 2018; Ramo´n-
Llorens, Garcı´a-Meca, & Dure´ndez, 2017). Risk
aversion and reluctance to reduce family owners’
control of the ﬁrm (Ferna´ndez & Nieto, 2005;
Go´mez-Mejı´a et al., 2010; Schulze, Lubatkin, Dino,
& Buchholtz, 2001; Sciascia, Mazzola, Astrachan, &
Pieper, 2012) also limit the family ﬁrm’s access to
the ﬁnancial resources needed for internationaliza-
tion. Family ﬁrms can increase their access to the
managerial
and
ﬁnancial
resources
needed
to
develop their international scale by involving out-
side (i.e., nonfamily) parties in ﬁrm governance
(Arregle, Naldi, Nordqvist, & Hitt, 2012), and by
raising external capital from minority domestic and
foreign shareholders (Dick, Mitter, Feldbauer-Durst-
mu¨ller, & Pernsteiner, 2017; Majocchi et al., 2018).
Outside board members are an important source of
experience, knowledge, and professional skills (Cal-
abro`,
Mussolino,
&
Huse,
2009;
Purkayastha,
Manolova, & Edelman, 2018; Sundaramurthy &
Dean, 2008). Their positive inﬂuence on interna-
tional scale is also associated with their impact on
board dynamics: the presence of outsiders is asso-
ciated
with reduced principal–principal
agency
conﬂict (that is, among family and non-family
shareholders; Calabro`, Torchia, Pukall, & Mus-
solino, 2013; Singla, George, & Veliyath, 2017)
and with increased rationality, professional con-
duct, and more careful consideration of strategic
options
(Herrera-Echeverri,
Geleilate,
Gaitan-
Rian˜o, Haar, & Soto-Echeverry, 2016; Majocchi &
Strange, 2012). Minority foreign investors are also a
valuable source of international market knowledge
(Ferna´ndez & Nieto, 2006). Hence, both outside
directors and nonfamily ownership are positively
related to family ﬁrms’ international scale.
Scholars agree that family ﬁrms’ social capital
also inﬂuences international scale. However, the
nature of social capital’s impact is complex. Gen-
erally, a family ﬁrm’s organizational social capital is
uniquely inﬂuenced by the family’s social capital
(Arregle et al., 2007), which is characterized by
devotion, generosity, solidarity, and close social
interactions among family members (Bourdieu,
1994). Such family ﬁrm’s social capital lowers
monitoring
costs,
reduces
relational
risk,
and
allows family ﬁrms to develop effective informal
mechanisms (Mustakallio, Autio, & Zahra, 2002)
that reduce their cost of governance. It also facil-
itates knowledge sharing, expands ﬁrm-level rela-
tional capital (Arregle et al., 2007; Dyer & Singh,
1998;
Kano,
Ciravegna,
&
Rattalino,
2021),
increases the speed of decision-making (Gallo &
Pont, 1996), and facilitates family ﬁrm access to
international knowledge and host country net-
works (Basly, 2007; Cheong, Lee, & Lee, 2015).
Hence, it positively inﬂuences their international
scale. However, strong forms of family social capital
can also hinder internationalization. Strong family
social capital can lead to groupthink (Janis, 1982),
amoral familism (the systematic and dysfunctional
distrust of outsiders; Banﬁeld, 1958), and strategic
hyper-simplicity (the overspecialization on a sim-
ple competitive repertoire undermining adaptation
and performance; Miller & Chen, 1996). Those
factors, when combined with the limited diversity
of family managers’ social capital and professional
experience, can reduce networking and constrain
the ﬁrm’s capabilities (Stadler, Mayer, Hautz, &
Matzler, 2018) and international scale. It follows
that whether or not family ﬁrms’ social capital
assists in developing international scale depends on
speciﬁc uses of social networks in each ﬁrm,
particularly in relation to other types of resources.
Scholars also disagree about which generation of
family leadership is more likely to increase inter-
national scale (Banno` & Trento, 2016; Dou et al.,
2019; van Essen et al., 2015). Claver, Rienda, and
Quer (2008) hold that ﬁrst-generation owners and
managers are more risk tolerant and more likely to
support
internationalization.
Others
(Cristiano,
2018; Fang, Kotlar, Memili, Chrisman, & De Massis,
2018; Okoroafo & Perryy, 2010) ﬁnd that succeed-
ing generations of family leaders may be more open
to new ideas and growth opportunities and thus
contribute to increasing internationalization. We
suspect
that
these
divergent
results
can
be
explained by addressing speciﬁc characteristics of
each generations (e.g., levels of education, aspira-
tions, extant international experience), as well as
by other heterogeneous characteristics of ﬁrms
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1169
Journal of International Business Studies

(e.g., family ownership concentration, inheritance
rules, minority shareholder protection). These con-
jectures await rigorous testing.
Hennart et al. (2019) contend that, although
family ﬁrms on balance tend to be less interna-
tional, those that focus on high-quality niche
products may be well positioned on a global scale.
A focus on high-quality niche products helps
family ﬁrms overcome idiosyncratic international-
ization constraints and allows them to leverage
their unique capabilities. Hennart et al. (2019) ﬁnd
that family ﬁrms pursuing a high-quality global
niche business model achieve similar internation-
alization (exports) as their nonfamily counterparts.
Eddleston, Sarathy, and Banalieva (2019) elaborate
that such niche strategies work best for profession-
alized family ﬁrms located in countries with a
comparatively strong reputation for quality. More
generally, the conclusions by Eddleston et al.
(2019) point to the moderating role of macro-level
formal and informal institutions and ﬁrm-level
governance practices.
A number of studies conﬁrm that a variety of
institutional
attributes
moderates
international
scale. With regard to formal institutions, Arregle
et al. (2017) argue that greater minority share-
holder protection in the home country exacerbates
the negative family ﬁrm–internationalization rela-
tionship. More speciﬁcally, greater protection offers
minority shareholders an enhanced opportunity to
monitor family activity, which harms the relation-
ship between minority shareholders and majority
family owners and, consequently, reduces access to
resources that family ﬁrms need to internationalize.
Lehrer and Celo (2017) suggest that national insti-
tutional characteristics (i.e., favorable inheritance
rules, overall export orientation of the economy,
and symbiotic relations between family ﬁrms and
large
internationalized
nonfamily
ﬁrms)
help
explain the high internationalization level of Ger-
man family ﬁrms.
Among the few studies that investigate the
impact of informal institutions, Arregle et al.
(2019) suggest that family-level background char-
acteristics, such as family structure, history, and
values/traditions,
inﬂuence
international
scale.
Similarly, soft factors like trust towards other
countries
(‘‘generalized
trust’’)
(Arregle
et
al.,
2017) and a family-oriented political ideology of
government (Duran, Kostova, & van Essen, 2017)
are positively related to family ﬁrms’ international
scale. Studies incorporating macro-level variables
generally
conclude
that
family
ﬁrm
internationalization is context-dependent, and that
cross-country institutional differences are critical to
explaining the relationships between family own-
ership–management and internationalization.
In sum, existing research has not identiﬁed a
consistent generalized relationship between family
involvement
and
international
scale.
Recently,
scholars have argued that the search for a general
relationship (i.e., whether family ﬁrms are indeed
more or less internationalized than non-family
ones) is an elusive, if not futile, task. For example,
Kano and Verbeke (2018) note that the theoretical
challenge of establishing a general relationship
between family owner–management and interna-
tionalization is impossibly complicated by the
heterogeneity of family ﬁrms. Further, a large-scale
meta-analysis by Arregle et al. (2017) found no
evidence of a generalized relationship between
family owner-management and international scale.
Instead, it conﬁrmed that the nature of the rela-
tionship (facilitating versus constraining) is deter-
mined by a number of ﬁrm- and institutional-level
idiosyncratic features. As a result, researchers have
turned their attention to the effects of speciﬁc
variables on family ﬁrms’ international scale, or to
the exploration of complex and non-linear patterns
in those relationships (see Almodo´var, Verbeke, &
Rodrı´guez-Ruiz, 2016; Mitter, Duller, Feldbauer-
Durstmu¨ller, & Kraus, 2014; Sciascia et al., 2012).
Explaining Family Firms’ International Scope
Unlike broader IB research, most research on inter-
national family business does not conceptually or
empirically
differentiate
between
international
scale and scope. Therefore, the rationales, contin-
gencies, and variables described in the preceding
section on ‘international scale’ are, for the most
part, assumed to apply to the international scope of
the family ﬁrm. However, several studies speciﬁ-
cally account for international scope, proposing
more precise and robust theoretical mechanisms
and delivering empirical results that diverge from
those summarized earlier. For example, Alessandri,
Cerrato, and Eddleston (2018) conclude that family
involvement is associated with greater home region
orientation, while Arregle et al. (2017) and others
(Avrichir, Meneses, & dos Santos, 2016; Bauwer-
aerts & Vandernoot, 2019) speciﬁcally associate it
with reduced scope of internationalization. In
contrast, Zahra (2003) initially speculated, based
on stewardship theory, that family involvement
should have a positive effect on international
scope, but this paper actually found that the effects
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1170
Journal of International Business Studies

of ownership and management differ: ownership
exerted a positive effect on international scope, and
management a negative one. Given that Zahra’s
ﬁndings challenge key assumptions of the steward-
ship theory used to develop hypotheses, we address
the implications of this study in the assessment
section of this article (see also Table 2).
In the main, scholars offer four theoretical argu-
ments to account for lower international scope
among family ﬁrms. First, Xu, Hitt, and Dai (2020a)
argue that increasing international scope creates
higher demands on resources, which increases the
risk of SEW losses. Second, family leaders are
motivated to use their personal business networks
to facilitate internationalization, and they tend to
prioritize high network trust and high collabora-
tion
intensity
(Cesinger, Hughes,
Mensching,
Bouncken, Fredrich, & Kraus, 2016). However, since
these personal network ties tend to be limited and
regionally bound, international scope tends to be
restricted (Jimenez, Majocchi, & Della Piana, 2019;
Tsang, 2020) or constrained to a particular region
(Banalieva & Eddleston, 2011). Third, increased
international diversity requires greater interna-
tional experience on the part of family members,
as well as access to additional capabilities and
resources. However, strong family social capital can
hinder international scope by limiting the range of
available managerial capabilities in a family ﬁrm. It
can lead to a mismatch between the pool of
competencies available in family managers’ social
networks and the growing diversity needed for
international scope expansion, which reinforces
the liability of foreignness for family ﬁrms (D’An-
gelo, Majocchi, & Buck, 2016; Stadler et al., 2018).
Finally, strong family social capital helps perpetu-
ate the imprint of the founder on strategy across
generations of leadership, which can limit changes
in international scope (Suman, 2017).
Other studies explored the impact of outsiders,
such as non-family managers, investors, and board
members, on international scope. D’Angelo et al.
(2016) ﬁnd that outsiders can provide the bridging
and bonding social capital needed to promote
international scope, but that these beneﬁts from
outsiders are moderated by the level of family
inﬂuence. In family-inﬂuenced ﬁrms (that is, those
in which the family lacks unilateral control), out-
siders have a positive inﬂuence on international
scope; the positive effects of family governance can
combine synergistically with their presence. This
positive inﬂuence does not hold true in family-
controlled ﬁrms due to internal family dynamics
and, in many cases, conﬂicting objectives (e.g.,
dominant family owner–managers strategic choices
may be driven by identity-related concerns such as
SEW), differing value systems (e.g., the moral order
of kinship versus ‘amoral’ motives like shareholder
value maximization; Sirmon & Hitt, 2003), and
bifurcation bias (deﬁned as a systemic preferential
treatment of family assets over nonfamily ones;
Kano & Verbeke, 2018).7 Additionally, as afore-
mentioned, a strategic positioning on high-quality
niche products can help these family ﬁrms to
overcome
their
internationalization
constraints
(Hennart et al., 2019) and achieve similar interna-
tional scope as their nonfamily counterparts.
Overall, our review suggests that the interna-
tional scope of family ﬁrms is more constrained
than that of nonfamily ﬁrms. While the involve-
ment of external actors can alleviate some con-
straints and positively moderate the international
scope of family ﬁrms, the level of family involve-
ment and strategic objectives of the family ﬁrm are
also inﬂuential. Studies on family ﬁrm interna-
tional scope show a strong degree of consensus on
the effects of various variables related to family
owner–management,
unlike
studies
examining
other aspects of internationalization.
Explaining Family Firms’ International Entry
Modes
A
signiﬁcant
number
of
studies
(18%
of
the
reviewed articles) investigate the inﬂuence of fam-
ily ownership and management on international
entry mode choice and partner selection. In the
main, researchers assume that family ﬁrm owners
and managers are inherently risk averse and will
tend to adopt entry mode strategies that minimize
various
risks,
such
as
committing
too
many
resources to a single venture (Filatotchev, Strange,
Piesse, & Lien, 2007) or dealing with uncertainty
(Kao & Kuo, 2017; Kao, Kuo, & Chang, 2013; Kuo,
Kao, Chang, & Chiu, 2012). Family ﬁrms may also
select entry modes that minimize the risk of SEW
dissipation (e.g., Monreal-Pe´rez & Sa´nchez-Marı´n,
2017; Scholes, Mustafa, & Chen, 2016). However,
different theoretical perspectives suggest that risk
aversion
may
lead
to
different
entry
mode
preferences.
Studies that approach entry mode choice from a
comparative institutional analysis perspective (i.e.,
transaction cost economics (TCE) and internaliza-
tion theory) suggest that family ﬁrms use cooper-
ative
entry
modes
as
a
way
to
address
risks
associated with low levels of foreign experience
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1171
Journal of International Business Studies

(Kuo et al., 2012). Sestu and Majocchi (2020) argue
that joint ventures (JV) are more likely when both
potential partners are family-owned and managed.
A family ﬁrm typically own some family-related
idiosyncratic assets (such as reputational assets or a
long-established network of relationships) that are
embedded in the ﬁrm and therefore difﬁcult to
trade. As such, when assets owned by family ﬁrms
in different countries are complementary and bun-
dled, a JV is the only efﬁcient governance solution.
The decision further depends on the presence of
bifurcation bias and on the type of assets deployed
in host countries (Kano & Verbeke, 2018; Verbeke
& Kano, 2012). Kano and Verbeke argue that when
transferring ‘heritage’ assets, i.e., those that hold an
emotional/affective meaning for the family, family
ﬁrms are likely to choose entry modes that maxi-
mize control, such as wholly owned subsidiaries
(WOS), in order to protect these assets. On the
other hand, when transferring ‘commodity’ assets,
family ﬁrms will seek entry modes that afford the
maximum proﬁt potential, regardless of the actual
value, contribution, and vulnerability of the assets
deployed. Studies using agency theory suggest that
high resource commitment entry modes, such as
WOS, expose the family ﬁrm to problems associ-
ated with adverse selection (e.g., supply chain
partner quality may be difﬁcult to determine ex
ante) and hold-up (e.g., enforcement of contract
and other legal issues can make WOS costly to exit).
These issues increase agency costs (Filatotchev
et al., 2007) and prevent family ﬁrms from com-
mitting
extensive
resource
bundles
in
host
countries.
SEW-framed studies diverge on the effects of SEW
on family ﬁrms’ foreign entry mode choices. Some
scholars assert that family ﬁrms prefer to enter
foreign markets through low commitment modes
such as export in order to minimize the potential
SEW dissipation risk associated with FDI (Monreal-
Pe´rez & Sa´nchez-Marı´n, 2017; Scholes et al., 2016).
However, WOS afford family ﬁrms greater control
over operations and therefore may be preferred by
family ﬁrms that seek to protect SEW (Abdellatif,
Amann, & Jaussaud, 2010; Pongelli, Calabro`, &
Basco, 2019; Pongelli, Caroli, & Cucculelli, 2016).
Pongelli et al. (2016) note, however, that entry
preference is likely inﬂuenced by family ownership
structure, as well as the weight placed by the family
on SEW preservation. Scholars have pointed out a
family ﬁrm paradox in the realm of international JV
formation: family ﬁrms seem to have a lower
willingness to form international JVs, due to the
desire to preserve control, even if they have a
higher ability to govern them due to their superior
relational capabilities (Debellis, De Massis, Petruz-
zelli, Frattini, & Del Giudice, 2020). Further, the
establishment choice for WOS – the choice between
a greenﬁeld and an acquisition – has also been
investigated, with the majority of studies conclud-
ing that family ﬁrms prefer greenﬁeld entry to
acquisitions, so as to avoid complex acquisition
integration processes and maintain full control
over the subsidiary, that is, its stafﬁng, organiza-
tional design, structure, partnerships, and estab-
lished routines (Boellis, Mariotti, Minichilli, &
Piscitello, 2016; Yamanoi & Asaba, 2018). Boellis
et al. (2016) further clarify that the preference is less
pronounced in family-owned (rather than family-
managed) ﬁrms, which are more likely to seek
access to external equity to ﬁnance the acquisition,
and to have professional managers with the requi-
site integration skills.
The Uppsala model of internationalization (Jo-
hanson & Vahlne, 1977, 2009; Vahlne & Johanson,
2017) suggests that psychic distance, as well as
the liability of outsidership and associated difﬁcul-
ties in penetrating host country networks, shape
patterns and modes of international expansion.
Kontinen and Ojala (2010), using the Uppsala lens
to study family ﬁrms’ entry mode choices, argue
that family ﬁrms exhibit greater cautiousness when
entering psychically distant markets by choosing
indirect (i.e.,
non-equity) entry
modes.
Family
ﬁrms may subsequently deepen their commitments
to foreign markets through FDI. Similarly, Stieg,
Cesinger, Apfelthaler, Kraus, and Cheng (2018)
observe that, as a family ﬁrm’s FDI commitment
to foreign markets grows, the ﬁrm faces the chal-
lenge of shifting its natural emphasis from an
internal focus on preserving family harmony to
building external networks and resources. This may
slow the family ﬁrm’s progression toward higher-
commitment operating modes in foreign markets.
Entry mode decisions in family ﬁrms are multi-
dimensional and contingent on, inter alia, the tim-
ing of entry, strategic considerations, and macro-
level variables. Further, mode choices are dynamic
and may evolve through different stages of inter-
national expansion. Several recent studies high-
light
these nuances
and
contingencies
of
operating mode dynamics in family ﬁrms. For
example, Xu,
Hitt,
and
Miller
(2020b),
intro-
duce decision-making stage as a moderating vari-
able, holding that, in the ﬁrst stage (entry mode
decision), family ﬁrms prefer JVs compared to
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1172
Journal of International Business Studies

WOS, because the former entail lower ﬁnancial
risks and preserve SEW. In the second stage (i.e.,
establishment mode decision), the level of family
ownership positively inﬂuences the likelihood of
choosing acquisition as the entry mode; acquiring
an ongoing business with access to local networks
and markets potentially increases ﬁnancial returns
while reducing threats to SEW. Motivation for
foreign expansion also plays a role: family ﬁrms
that enter foreign markets with a strategic asset
seeking motive may show a greater propensity for
acquisitions as a way to quickly obtain comple-
mentary assets and catch up with international
competitors – a strategy that may be more pro-
nounced among family ﬁrms in emerging econo-
mies (Rienda, Claver, Quer, & Andreu, 2019).
IB research has long established that ﬁrm bound-
aries depend on macro-level characteristics of home
and host countries, with institutions playing a
critical role in multinational enterprises’ (MNEs’)
entry mode strategies (Brouthers & Hennart, 2007).
Consequently, institutional variables are used to
explain the contextual effects moderating the rela-
tionships between family ﬁrms’ characteristics and
their entry mode decisions. Such variables include
the home country’s national business systems (i.e.,
coordinated versus market economies, Geppert,
Do¨rrenba¨cher,
Gammelgaard,
&
Taplin,
2013),
stage of economic development (e.g., family ﬁrms
from emerging countries especially favor acquisi-
tions when entering developed countries), and the
corporate governance practices and rules perceived
as legitimate (Luo, Chung, & Sobcza, 2009). Foreign
partners whose home country institutional logic -
more closely resembles family governance princi-
ples are probably more open to JVs with family
ﬁrms.
To summarize, our review suggests that family
ﬁrms do not exhibit a de facto preference for a
particular entry mode. The aggregate analysis of
studies addressing family ﬁrms’ entry mode choice
is consistent with a conceptualization of operating
modes proposed by Benito, Petersen, and Welch
(2009): Similar to the case of MNEs with dispersed
ownership, family ﬁrms choose bundles and pack-
ages of entry modes based on internal and external
contextual factors. These modes are adjusted over
time as a function of changing internal and exter-
nal environments and ﬁrms’ evolving experiences.
Our view is that many of the conﬂicting results
presented in this section are likely driven by
contextual
differences
among
samples.
The
prospect that other perspectives may lend further
insight is addressed later in this article.
Explaining Family Firms’ International Location
Choice
Location and entry mode selection are distinct yet
interrelated decisions (Benito et al., 2009). As with
studies addressing entry mode choice, studies that
investigate
family
ﬁrms’
location
choice
yield
mixed ﬁndings, partially due to the fact that risk
aversion, along with SEW, may lead to different
internationalization paths depending on a ﬁrm’s
strategic objectives. For example, Lien and Fila-
totchev (2015) observe that high levels of family
ownership tend to be associated with higher-risk
FDI locations, and attribute this effect to the fact
that large block shareholding in family-owned
ﬁrms facilitates increased monitoring capability
and can thus mitigate agency conﬂicts associated
with managerial risk aversion. On the other hand,
family ﬁrms may favor home regions and culturally
similar foreign locations (seen as less risky) in order
to protect their equity and their SEW (Baronchelli
et al., 2016; Go´mez-Mejı´a et al., 2010; Procher,
Urbig, & Volkmann, 2013; Strange, Filatotchev,
Lien, & Piesse, 2009).
Attention to internal (cognitive) and external
(market-based) contextual heterogeneity helps rec-
oncile conﬂicting results. For example, Boers (2016)
posits
that
psychic
distance
impacts
location
choice, but his qualitative study establishes no de
facto preference for low psychic distance locations
in family ﬁrms. Rather, he ﬁnds that market choice
is strongly inﬂuenced by another internal contex-
tual factor – the risk preference of the controlling
family. Kano and Verbeke (2018) argue that yet
another internal contextual factor, bifurcation bias,
inﬂuences location choice. They posit that strong
bifurcation bias motivates family ﬁrms to choose
FDI destinations based on a family’s personal
preferences, the presence of family networks, and
the type of assets invested overseas. The transfer of
‘heritage’ assets will lead bifurcation-biased ﬁrms to
favor locations that allow ownership of operations
by foreign investors. In contrast, unbiased family
ﬁrms (that is, those that implement routines to
safeguard against potential bifurcation bias, and in
which internationalization decisions are driven by
comparative efﬁciency considerations) choose for-
eign markets based on location advantages. In this
case, family ﬁrms do not display unique location
choice patterns.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1173
Journal of International Business Studies

As such, we conclude from our literature review
that no consistent generalized relationship between
family ownership/control and location choices has
been established. Rather, evidence suggests differ-
ences in external contexts and across ﬁrms account
for diverging decisions in the realm of international
location choice.
Explaining Family Firms’ Internationalization
Process
The majority of reviewed studies conclude that
family ﬁrms tend to pursue a traditional, stepwise
internationalization
model
(Graves
&
Thomas,
2008; Kontinen & Ojala, 2010, 2012), starting with
entry through lower-commitment modes, usually
in more psychically proximate countries (Claver,
Rienda, & Quer, 2008). Patterns of gradual, stepwise
expansion are attributed to the challenge of over-
coming resource constraints and acquiring the
managerial
skills,
knowledge,
and
experience
needed to compete in international markets (Mine-
tti, Murro, & Zhu, 2015). These constraints make it
difﬁcult for family ﬁrms to overcome the liability of
foreignness in distant markets. Family owners’ risk
attitudes also help explain the preference for step-
wise internationalization.
However, a number of reviewed papers identify
factors that might cause family ﬁrms to interna-
tionalize rapidly or to pursue nontraditional inter-
nationalization patterns. For example, Hennart
et al. (2019) note that family ﬁrms selling mass-
market products that require extensive adaptation
in host markets suitably adopt a stepwise interna-
tionalization process; nonetheless, family ﬁrms
pursuing a global high-quality niche strategy can
quickly reach high scale and scope of internation-
alization
through
export.
Kontinen
and
Ojala
(2012) ﬁnd that, whereas strong stewardship is
associated with a stepwise process, weak/moderate
stewardship attitudes within the family ﬁrm are
correlated with so-called ‘born global’ or ‘born-
again
global’
patterns
of
internationalization.
Meanwhile, Stieg, Hiebl, Kraus, Schu¨ssler, and
Sattler’s (2017) study ‘born-again global’ family
ﬁrms and conclude that succeeding generations of
family
ﬁrm
leadership, assuming the requisite
education and experience, often re-commit the
ﬁrm to its original strategic orientation and engage
in quick and extensive internationalization. Fer-
na´ndez-Moya (2010) describes early and intense
internationalization at the successful Spanish pub-
lishing house Salvat; the ﬁrm’s quick evolution
from a small family business to a large family-
owned MNE was supported by capacities for tech-
nological and managerial innovation, diverse social
networks, and the professionalization of the ﬁrm’s
management.
More broadly, the international expansion pro-
cess is thought to follow speciﬁc pathways deter-
mined by individual, family, organizational, and
environmental factors. Individual factors refer to
such characteristics of family members as capabil-
ities, stewardship attitudes, and vision and quality
of the next generation. At the family level, family
aspirations and the degree of family harmony play
a role (Graves & Thomas, 2008). Organizational
factors include strategic considerations, required
resources and capabilities, quality of human capi-
tal, openness of governance (Casillas, Moreno, &
Acedo, 2010), historical origins of the ﬁrm (Huesca-
Dorantes, Michailova, & Stringer, 2018), and the
nature of relationships within and outside the ﬁrm
(Cristiano, 2018). Environmental factors encom-
pass various characteristics of the home and host
country environment, such as socio-geographic
factors, the economic and cultural heritage of
home countries, and prevailing cultural values in
home and host societies (Shapiro, Gedajlovic, &
Erdener, 2003; Verbeke, Yuan, & Kano, 2020).
Intergenerational involvement emerged as a key,
but controversial, feature shaping the internation-
alization process (Graves & Thomas, 2008). Oko-
roafo (1999) argues that family ﬁrms that do not
internationalize in the ﬁrst and second generations
are unlikely to do so in later generations. In
contrast, Calabro`, Brogi and Torchia (2016) and
Cristiano (2018) argue that the involvement of
incoming generations positively inﬂuences explo-
ration and exploitation of international opportu-
nities, as later generations are more risk tolerant
and may be more open to new ideas. However, this
effect is contingent on a variety of family attributes,
such as the relationships between generations,
objectives of the incoming generation, and levels
of education and international experience (Stieg
et al., 2017).
Several studies focus on speciﬁc features of the
internationalization process, such as international
opportunity recognition. Here, the ﬁndings split
again. Zaefarian, Eng, and Tasavori (2016) argue
that family ﬁrms do not proactively initiate inter-
national opportunity identiﬁcation (a conclusion
echoed in Ratten & Tajeddini, 2017), but rather
learn about cross-border opportunities through
accidental discovery, e.g., information acquired
through
acquaintances
and
social
networks.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1174
Journal of International Business Studies

Marinova and Marinov (2017) arrive at the opposite
conclusion, concluding that most family ﬁrms in
their study proactively sought international clients.
Proactive behavior is linked to the family’s inter-
national orientation and commitment, as well as to
the breadth of its social capital. Similarly, Kontinen
and Ojala (2011) observe that ﬁrms recognized
international opportunities when they established
new formal ties but failed to do so when they relied
on existing informal or family ties.
Finally, learning is a key determinant of the
internationalization process, as illustrated in a rich
historical study of large Spanish family ﬁrms by
Puig and Pe´rez (2009). The authors ﬁnd that a ﬁrm’s
learning process is path-dependent and strongly
shaped by major historical events, local and global
tensions, and ongoing trends in globalization (see
also Castagnoli, 2014). Family ﬁrms that interna-
tionalized successfully are able to learn managerial
lessons from traditional corporations and to adapt
to the external environment by diversifying and
changing specializations and market niches. Main-
taining strong links to local, national and interna-
tional networks emerged as a critical factor in
survival and growth of family ﬁrms. These links
(often aided by collective action, such as large
family lobby groups) facilitated global commercial
and political knowledge sharing, fundamental for
the development of family capitalism (Harlaftis &
Theotokas, 2004; Pe´rez & Puig, 2009).
We conclude that family ﬁrms’ international
expansion does not follow a particular generalized
pattern. Collectively, the studies indicate that in-
ternationalization patterns and processes in family
ﬁrms are idiosyncratic and shaped by history as
well as a variety of family, organization, and
environment-level variables. Family ﬁrm differ-
ences across these variables explain the contradict-
ing results discussed above.
Explaining Temporal Aspects Of Family Firms’
Internationalization
Some studies in our sample focused speciﬁcally on
exploring the pace, rhythm (the regularity of
foreign expansion), and timing (early versus later
in a ﬁrm’s development) of family ﬁrm interna-
tionalization. While it is often assumed that family
ﬁrms internationalize slowly and follow a stepwise
pattern
of
international
expansion
(Graves
&
Thomas,
2008),
studies
focusing
on
temporal
dimensions
of
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
suggest that the process is more nuanced. For
example, Lin (2012) shows that family ownership
increases
the
pace
of
internationalization
but
throws off its rhythm (i.e., internationalization
becomes more irregular). Stieg et al. (2017) ﬁnd
that the timing of internationalization is linked to
generational successions, but its pace is shaped by
successor attributes, such as the successor’s inter-
national experience and education level. Kontinen
and Ojala (2012) suggest that higher levels of
ownership concentration following succession cor-
respond with a greater pace of internationalization.
In sum, our review suggests that the temporal
patterns of family ﬁrm internationalization are
contingent on characteristics of the family ﬁrm
(e.g., ownership concentration, succession, succes-
sor attributes), and probably moderated by other
dimensions of the internationalization process,
including its scale, scope, and stage.
Explaining Family Firms’ Internationalization
Performance
Studies that investigate family ﬁrm international-
ization performance mainly focus on ﬁnancial
outcomes (see Appendix 1). As expected, ﬁndings
about the effects of family ﬁrms’ internationaliza-
tion on performance are mixed, with some report-
ing positive (e.g., Stadler, Mayer, Hautz, & Matzler,
2018; van Essen et al., 2015) and others negative
effects (Graves & Shan, 2014; Hsu, Kao, & Lee,
2016; Tsao & Lien, 2013). Explanations for these
outcomes range from the agency beneﬁts of family
governance on ﬁnancial performance (Hsu et al.,
2016) to the constraining effects of family ﬁrm’s
social networks (Stadler et al., 2018). Seeking to
reconcile
divergent
ﬁndings,
researchers
have
turned their attention to international performance
contingencies. Mensching, Calabro`, Eggers, and
Kraus (2016) show that, the greater the family
inﬂuence, the more likely the overall perceived
success of internationalization; yet these results
only apply to host countries with low geographic
and cultural distances. Similarly, Banalieva and
Eddleston (2011) ﬁnd that family ﬁrms led by
family members report higher performance when
pursuing a high home region orientation focus,
whereas nonfamily leaders generate better perfor-
mance for family ﬁrms expanding outside of the
home region. Herna´ndez-Perlines, Moreno-Garcı´a,
and Yan˜ez-Araque (2016) and Herna´ndez-Perlines
and Xu (2018) ﬁnd that international entrepreneur-
ship orientation (IEO) largely explains interna-
tional
performance
of
family
businesses,
with
innovation the most important dimension of IEO.
This IEO–performance relationship is positively
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1175
Journal of International Business Studies

mediated by absorptive capacity and by the ﬁrm’s
environment. Ferna´ndez-Moya (2010), Pe´rez and
Puig (2009), and Puig and Pe´rez (2009) focus on
non-ﬁnancial
outcomes
of
internationalization,
such as the evolution of a small family ﬁrm into a
large family-owned MNE and the successful inte-
gration of family-owned ﬁrms into the global
economy. These papers ﬁnd that these desirable
outcomes are shaped by several factors: managerial
skills, capacity for innovation, learning, and ability
to adapt to environmental changes. Finally, Lu,
Liang, Shan, and Liang (2015) discover that the
internationalization of Chinese family ﬁrms pro-
motes medium-term growth (i.e., over 3 years) but
harms
short-term
proﬁtability
due
to
ﬁrms’
resource constraints and the mistakes they make
in the learning process.
More generally, some scholars argue that due to
the inherent heterogeneity of ﬁrms in general, and
family ﬁrms in particular, the search for a general
relationship
between
internationalization
and
ﬁnancial performance is a conceptual and empirical
nonstarter (Hennart, 2007; Verbeke & Brugman,
2009). These scholars advocate a more nuanced
approach to studying the performance of family
ﬁrm internationalization, including a focus on
non-ﬁnancial outcomes. For example, Du, Zeng,
and Chang (2018) ﬁnd that family ﬁrm interna-
tionalization
promotes
corporate
philanthropy,
and that a CEO’s political participation reinforces
this effect. Heileman and Pett (2018) show that
internationally active family ﬁrms are more likely
than domestic family ﬁrms to pass ownership to
the next generation of family members. In linking
international performance to family ﬁrms’ interna-
tional strategic objectives and internationalization
motives (Verbeke & Brugman, 2009; Verbeke &
Forootan, 2012), scholars can improve the quality
and precision of family ﬁrm internationalization
studies.
In conclusion, the study of family ﬁrm interna-
tionalization outcomes remains one of the most
divisive themes in the ﬁeld. While some scholars
attempt to establish a relationship between inter-
nationalization levels and ﬁnancial performance,
others, mainly IB scholars, argue that there is no
generalized relationship between internationaliza-
tion and ﬁnancial performance in family ﬁrms.
Importantly, non-ﬁnancial outcomes of interna-
tionalization – speciﬁcally those related to family
ﬁrms’
noneconomic
goals
–
remain
relatively
unexplored.
ASSESSMENT AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE
RESEARCH
As is already evident from this review, family ﬁrm
internationalization is highly contested territory,
one where scholars have energetically explored
theory, tested a variety of questions, and uncovered
a breadth of intriguing and yet largely unreconciled
ﬁndings. The ﬁeld is thus ripe for further develop-
ment – and in particular need of theory that may
help reconcile earlier ﬁndings. To that end, we
structured this review around themes that play a
central role in the IB literature, which we hope will
make this body of work more accessible and
relevant to the IB scholar. This review, therefore,
differs from extant reviews of this literature because
we draw equally on the family internationalization
and IB literatures to identify areas that may prove
especially fruitful for future research. These include
adopting canonical IB theoretical frames when
studying family ﬁrm internationalization, adopting
an original multilevel perspective from IB that
allows us to shift the level of analysis from the
ﬁrm to the individual, family, and macro levels,
paying greater attention to temporal perspectives,
improving our methodological toolkit, and explor-
ing IB-related phenomena that family scholars have
overlooked. These approaches, detailed in the fol-
lowing sections, should help both IB and family
business scholars address the inconsistencies in the
current literature, and further our knowledge and
theory on new IB topics.
International Business Theoretical Approaches
And Family Firm Internationalization
As we have seen, a wide breadth of theories has
been employed in the study of family ﬁrm inter-
nationalization. These include general theories like
agency theory, RBV, resource dependency theory,
social capital, stewardship theory, and TCE, and
family business-centric perspectives like SEW and
bifurcation bias. Yet, less than 20% of reviewed
studies drew on IB theory to inform their analyses.8
Relevant disciplinary theories, including internal-
ization theory, the Uppsala model, the Ownership-
Location-Internalization (OLI) paradigm, and inter-
national entrepreneurship perspectives, were rarely
used as a conceptual lens, and only 36% of the
reviewed studies were published in IB journals. The
neglect of IB theory is a missed opportunity. IB
research has developed rich and eclectic theory that
reﬂects the essence of governing international
transactions. We need a more consistent use of a
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1176
Journal of International Business Studies

broad, IB-focused theoretical framework in order to
accurately explain and predict family ﬁrm interna-
tionalization and reconcile the mixed ﬁndings
produced so far.
The notion that ﬁrms can create value in cross-
border operations by effectively and efﬁciently
matching core ﬁrm-speciﬁc advantages (FSAs) with
the advantages, opportunities, and challenges of
foreign locations lies at the heart of IB theory
(Verbeke, 2013). To create value this way, ﬁrms
must overcome the liability of foreignness (Johan-
son & Vahlne, 1977, 2009; Zaheer, 1995), or the
added costs created by cultural, institutional, geo-
graphic, and economic distance between home and
host countries (Ghemawat, 2003a). Classic IB the-
ory studies how ﬁrms achieve internationalization
objectives in the face of these market imperfec-
tions, and links value creation in international
markets to a number of core concepts, namely,
motivation for internationalization, foreign loca-
tion choice, entry mode choice, entrepreneurial
resource orchestration, knowledge transfer, man-
agement of a multinational network, and timing of
internationalization
(Verbeke,
2013).
In
other
words, a variety of IB theories, including internal-
ization theory, an internationally focused version
of TCE, the Uppsala model, the OLI paradigm, the
knowledge-based view of the MNE (Kogut & Zan-
der, 1992), evolutionary theory of the MNE (Cant-
well, 1989), springboard perspective (Luo & Tung,
2018), and the network view of the MNE (Forsgren,
2017) provide precise analytical lenses for studying
the ‘what, where, and how’ (Dunning, 1993; Dun-
ning & Kundu, 1995) of family ﬁrm international-
ization. Limited integration of IB theories into
family ﬁrm internationalization research, as found
in our review of extant literature, presents barriers
for advancing this ﬁeld of study.
Some have suggested that economic-based IB
theory is limited in explaining unique motivations,
behaviors, and tensions of internationalizing fam-
ily ﬁrms. Speciﬁcally, scholars have argued that IB
theory does not account for conﬂicts within family-
based management and ownership groups (Reuber,
2016), does not sufﬁciently address behavioral
aspects relevant for international strategy (Pukall
& Calabro`, 2014), and has limited applicability to
situations in which non-economic motives drive
international strategy (Rugman, 1981). Therefore,
we argue that family ﬁrm internationalization is
best understood at the intersection of IB, family
business-centric, and general theoretical perspec-
tives
(De
Massis
et
al.,
2018).
A
simpliﬁed
integrative model of family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion rooted in IB theory is presented in Figure 1.
The framework is inspired by IB research (Benito
et al., 2009; Verbeke & Kano, 2016) but also draws
upon relevant complementary perspectives identi-
ﬁed through our review, in order to paint a
comprehensive
picture
of
family
ﬁrm
internationalization.
The starting point of our analysis is the ﬁrm’s
resource reservoir (Figure 1, Box 1). From the IB
perspective, value creation in international markets
depends on the ﬁrm’s ability to transfer its FSAs to
host markets, develop new FSAs in host markets,
and recombine extant and new FSAs in novel ways.
Thus, whether FSAs are location-bound (LB - non-
transferable) and non-location-bound (NLB - trans-
ferable) matters. Here, the family ﬁrm literature
suggests some barriers to FSA development and
transfer in family ﬁrms may be idiosyncratic; e.g.,
SEW and bifurcation bias may constrict the transfer
of FSAs. Thus, the family business literature high-
lights how the unique resource endowment of
family ﬁrms, as well as their idiosyncratic resource
gaps and family-inﬂuenced strategic logic (Graves
& Thomas, 2008), shape their conduct.
Motivations for international expansion and,
consequently, FSA transfer (Figure 1, Box 2) are
also best understood from a multidisciplinary van-
tage point. IB theory explains the economic value
proposition of foreign expansion – that is, the
nature of advantages sought in foreign locations
relative to the home country, such as resource-,
market-,
strategic
asset–,
and
efﬁciency-based
advantages (Dunning, 1993). In family ﬁrms, these
‘traditional’ motives for internationalization are
often supplemented by family-centric, non-eco-
nomic motives, such as quality of life issues,
dynastic
aspirations,
reputation
enhancement,
and the establishment of a family legacy (Berrone,
Cruz, & Go´mez-Mejı´a, 2012; Hennart et al., 2019;
Kano & Verbeke, 2018).
Concentration of control in family ﬁrms (Morck,
Wolfenzon, & Yeung, 2005) allows the family to act
on its noneconomic preferences, thus inﬂuencing
the speciﬁc international governance decisions and
processes presented in Box 3 of Figure 1. Decisions
and processes that may differ in family ﬁrms
include location and entry mode choices, partner
selection strategies in cases of cooperative entry,
and the use of family social capital to facilitate and
safeguard foreign transactions. The rhythm and
speed of family ﬁrm internationalization also differ
because of the temporal orientation of family ﬁrms
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1177
Journal of International Business Studies

(Miller & Le Breton-Miller, 2005) and issues related
to generational succession. Here, IB-speciﬁc theo-
retical approaches such as, inter alia, internalization
theory, OLI, the Uppsala model, the network
theory, and the springboard perspective, are partic-
ularly useful for examining such decisions and
processes.
IB
theory
provides
speciﬁc
tools
that
allow
researchers to accurately link the complexities of
internationalization to the idiosyncratic character-
istics of family ﬁrms. For example, most family
business scholars studying family ﬁrm internation-
alization implicitly assume that internationaliza-
tion is a homogeneous phenomenon involving
signiﬁcant but predictable risks. Yet IB theory
clearly shows that international operations can
take many forms, each with a different risk proﬁle.
For example, and as discussed above, when foreign
sales are realized without FDI by exporting (as is the
case in many of the samples analyzed in our
literature review), family ﬁrms can beneﬁt from
their unique resource reservoirs to develop a high-
quality global niche strategy for exporting with
relatively little risk (Hennart et al., 2019).9 IB
theory thus provides an important baseline for
contextualizing family ﬁrm internationalization.
Family ﬁrm-speciﬁc perspectives, in turn, help
explain
why
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
behavior may deviate from patterns predicted by
efﬁciency-based IB theory.
IB theory suggests that, over time, competition
will eliminate inefﬁcient international governance
practices, such as those based on affective or biased
decision-making (Verbeke et al., 2020). Yet deci-
sion-making in family ﬁrms is strongly shaped by
affective factors, and/or by the family ﬁrms’ unique
goals (e.g., those related to SEW preservation). IB
theory is uniquely equipped to predict whether
international strategy conﬁgurations shaped by
such factors are likely to result in value creation
and growth in international markets, and whether
these conﬁgurations are sustainable over time.
Internationalization outcomes (Figure 1, Box 4)
ultimately lead to a feedback loop to the family
ﬁrm’s resource reservoir (Verbeke & Kano, 2016),
whereby the ﬁrm’s FSAs are adjusted and aug-
mented based on the ﬁrm’s past experience and
current operations (Benito et al., 2009; Johanson &
Vahlne, 1977, 2009). IB thus offers insights into the
dynamic process of internationalization and ﬁrm
growth, as opposed to the more static perspective of
family-centric research.
The ﬁrm is affected by, and in turn can affect, its
macro and micro-level contextual factors through
Figure 1
Theoretical treatment of family ﬁrm internationalization.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1178
Journal of International Business Studies

changes in governance (Williamson, 1996), as
shown in Box 5 of Figure 1. Institutional theory
highlights relevant macro-level features of institu-
tional environments of home and host countries.
IB theory extends these insights by examining the
multiple effects of distance between home and host
countries on international conﬁgurations. IB the-
ory traditionally pays less attention to micro (indi-
vidual-level) variables of family ﬁrm international
strategies (Kano & Verbeke, 2018), with some
exceptions
(e.g.,
behavioral
assumptions
of
bounded rationality and reliability). Here, family
business research adds insight by highlighting how
variables like family objectives, aspirations, and
biases, drive decision-making vis-a`-vis internation-
alization.
Moreover,
deeper
understanding
of
unique family-level contextual characteristics can
be obtained by using complementary perspectives
from adjacent theoretical ﬁelds, such as anthropol-
ogy and family science (Arregle et al., 2019).
To summarize, we argue that family ﬁrm inter-
nationalization is best understood from an IB
perspective, infused by insights from the family
ﬁrm literature as well as general management
theory, as outlined in Figure 1. IB theory provides
an analytical thread to connect various relevant
constructs so as to explain the internationalization
process in its entirety. Failure to engage IB theory in
family ﬁrm internationalization studies is one of
the reasons for the ﬁeld’s fragmentation.
Levels of Analysis in Family Firms’
Internationalization Research: An Imbalanced
Literature
IB research has an inherent multilevel structure,
one that becomes even more pronounced in studies
of family ﬁrm internationalization due to the
addition of the family as a level of analysis. As a
result, we propose four potential levels of analysis
(individual, family, ﬁrm, and macro) that can
inﬂuence family ﬁrms’ internationalization. Fig-
ure 2 visually presents our new framework, which
integrates these four levels of analysis with vari-
ables considered in existing studies and with vari-
ables that we believe future studies should explore
(in italics). As detailed below, several key insights
can be deduced from Figure 2.
In terms of levels of analysis, the extant family
ﬁrm
internationalization
literature
is
strongly
unbalanced, focusing overwhelmingly on the ﬁrm
level (97% of existing studies). Although some
studies include other levels of analysis, such as the
• Performance (ROA, profitability, 
turnover etc.)
• Growth
• Innovation
• Perceived success
• Business succession
• Appointment of non-family managers and 
directors
• CEO compensation
• Corporate philanthropy
• …
• Level of internationalization (gravity model)
• Scale (depth) of internationalization (Export 
Intensity, FSTS, FATA....)
• Scope (breadth) of internationalization
• Entry mode choice
• Home-region orientation
• Perceived risk of internationalization
• Foreign divestitures
• Exit, FDI partial or total divestments
• Re-entry
• Temporary internationalization
• …
Macro level: Industry: knowledge-intensive industries…
Country (home or host): Emerging country, corruption, family firm 
prevalence, political ideology, psychic distance, minority shareholder 
protection, generalized trust, inheritance rules and taxes, symbiotic 
relations between family firms and large internationalized nonfamily 
firms, dominant institutional logic, institutional complexity, 
institutional logics, religion, school, dominant family structure, 
institutional configuration (national business system), institutional 
context (political, normative, economic, social and family), culture, 
family firm density, family business legitimacy index…
Subnational region: rural/urban, industrial districts…
Supranational region: European Union, supraregional institutional 
context, supraregional institutional complexity…
Family level: Generation, succession, family harmony, family trust 
in external relationships, family trust or solidarity among family 
members, bridging and bonding social capital, family structure, 
family system (e.g., circumplex model), family communication 
pattern, parenting style, family stress, intergenerational solidarity, 
family history, family legacy, family branches, presence of family 
leaders…
Firm level: Family and external ownership (% or dummy), active 
family founder, family-CEO, death of the family CEO, family 
executives in TMT (# or %), family board representation (# or %) 
and experience, family-controlled firm, family-influenced firm, 
family ownership concentration, successors’ ownership and 
management, CEO duality, foreign institutional ownership, niche 
business model, number of generations in the firm, TMT overseas 
industry experience, transitioning from family control to non-family 
control…
Antecedents
Individual level variables (see “Individual level” box), e.g., international 
experience, risk attitude, mental model, small world representation…
Family level variables (see “Family level” box), e.g., family commitment 
culture, family system, bridging and bonding social capital, family structure, 
family values, intergenerational solidarity…
Firm level variables (see “Firm level” box), e.g., niche business model,
family and external ownership, family board representation, active family-
founder, board professionalization…
Macro level variables (see “Macro level” box), e.g., family business 
legitimacy index, political ideology, dominant institutional logic, corporate 
governance system, institutional complexity, inheritance rules and taxes…
Moderating/Mediating Forces
Aspects of Family Firm 
Internationalization Explored
Outcomes of Internationalization
Individual level: 
Family manager/owner’s international experience, education, 
business experience, risk attitude, gender, 
microfoundations/microeconomic behavior of individual agents, 
mental models, small world representation…
Italic: variables for future research
Figure 2
Levels of analysis in family ﬁrm internationalization studies: extant literature and future research.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1179
Journal of International Business Studies

individual level (12%), family level (22%), and
macro level (20%), cross-level inﬂuences remain
under-researched. Accordingly, we focus on the
individual, family, and macro levels, which present
signiﬁcant potential for future research.
Individual level
As compared to other IB studies, family ﬁrm-centric
studies tend to place greater focus on behavioral
aspects. However, most family ﬁrm international-
ization studies take for granted individual behav-
ioral aspects that shape decision-making, such as
family-centric, affect-based, and/or emotional fac-
tors. Indeed, quantitative studies using archival
data often assume but rarely measure behavioral
characteristics like stewardship, altruism, and risk
or loss aversion. Tsang (2006: 999) labels this
practice ‘‘assumption-omitted testing’’ and argues
that such treatment of behavioral assumptions
leads to unconvincing and contradictory empirical
results in theory-testing studies. For example, mul-
tiple authors report that family involvement in
ownership and/or management lessens interna-
tionalization due to the family’s desire to avoid
SEW dissipation (Banno` & Trento, 2016; Dou et al.,
2019; Go´mez-Mejı´a et al., 2010; Ray et al., 2018).
Wei and Tsao (2019), in contrast, argue that, due to
a family ﬁrm’s long-term orientation, many view
internationalization as an attractive investment
that can generate future value and increase SEW
over time (Xu et al., 2020a). Similar contradictions
appear in entry mode studies that build on SEW, as
discussed above. Yet, as Schulze and Kellermanns
(2015: 454) explain, researchers have relied mainly
on family ownership and family management
(both ﬁrm-level constructs) as proxy measures of
SEW, the dimensions of which ‘‘have remained
largely undeﬁned and unmeasured.’’ In some cases,
even ﬁrms with the same level of family ownership
and management are thought to have different
levels of SEW due to differing family preferences,
structures, values, and histories. Although SEW is
generally viewed as a ﬁrm-level construct, its roots
reside in family members’ attitudes, cognition, and
behaviors. Therefore, the microfoundations of SEW
should not be ignored in ﬁrm-level studies. This
contention is supported by Jiang et al. (2018), who
ﬁnd that most SEW research has overlooked the
micro-level mechanisms behind the cause-and-
effect relationships of SEW.
Further, even when explicated, micro-level theo-
retical assumptions lack consistency across studies
conducted from different theoretical perspectives.
For example, agency, and especially game theo-
retic, approaches assume full rationality, while TCE
assumes bounded rationality. The SEW perspective,
in contrast, assumes that affect strongly shapes
family ﬁrms’ conduct, causing them at times to
adopt strategies that deviate from ’rational’ proﬁt
maximization objectives. These divergent behav-
ioral assumptions thus yield conﬂicting conclu-
sions. However, with some exceptions such as
Banalieva and Eddleston (2011) and Holt (2012),
the family ﬁrm internationalization literature has
seen few attempts to reconcile them.
As such, while a rough consensus holds that
individuals in family ﬁrms can deviate from proﬁt
maximization
behavior
for
internationalization
and are subject to affective motivations and deci-
sion drivers (e.g., SEW, bifurcation bias), no agree-
ment exists on what these motivations are, when
they prevail, and how exactly these individual
motivations
maximize
family
utility.
Conse-
quently, the speciﬁc manifestations of relevant
actors’ affective preferences in ﬁrms’ international
strategy, and how they inﬂuence existing IB theo-
ries’ mechanisms, remain unclear. We argue that
the weak theoretical and empirical microfounda-
tions – a weakness also partially recognized in the
family business literature (De Massis & Foss, 2018) –
prevent scholars from painting a comprehensive
picture of family ﬁrm internationalization, and,
more generally, from leveraging the speciﬁcities of
family ﬁrms to further our knowledge on behav-
ioral components of internationalization. However,
this theoretical and empirical gap opens the door to
a series of intriguing research questions, including:
what kind of parsimonious behavioral assumptions
can present a theoretical baseline to explain the
behavior of both family and nonfamily actors in
family
ﬁrms?
How
does
this
behavior
affect
internationalization?
Additional theoretical insight is needed to fur-
ther our understanding about how other factors
shape individuals’ decisions about family ﬁrms’
internationalization. For example, Xu et al. (2020a)
drew on behavioral theory of the ﬁrm and found
that the role of SEW in family ﬁrms’ internation-
alization scale and scope is shaped by ﬁrm perfor-
mance: when ﬁnancial performance falls below
their aspiration level, family ﬁrms are willing to
enter more foreign markets (that is, increase scope)
despite the potential loss of SEW. Holt (2012) uses
image theory to identify conditions under which
external actors are able to inﬂuence scale and scope
of
family
ﬁrm
internationalization.
Behavioral
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1180
Journal of International Business Studies

strategy research thus enriches our understanding
of the internationalization behavior of family ﬁrms.
Cognitive perspectives lend added insight. They
suggest that individual decision-makers’ mental
models (i.e., an individual’s cognitive structures
and processes used to make sense of the world) or
small-world
representations
(i.e.,
lower
dimen-
sional sketches of a situation that an individual
believes has the salient characteristics for an appro-
priate decision) are helpful to delve into the
complex mechanisms of internationalization deci-
sions (see Maitland & Sammartino, 2015). We do
not know, for example, whether or how the family
context shapes family managers’ mental models
(e.g., different richness or connectedness) and their
internationalization decisions.
Behavioral economics, based on the seminal
works of Tversky and Kahneman (1974) and Kah-
neman
(2003),
offers
useful
conceptual
and
methodological tools for studying how economic
agents in family ﬁrms make judgments and deci-
sions related to internationalizations. Behavioral
economics holds that decision-makers often depart
from the rational proﬁt-maximizing behavior – an
assumption also shared by family ﬁrm scholars. In
particular, when managers make decisions within
the frame of a family context, the valuation of the
potential gains and losses is clearly affected by
family aspects. Nepotism (as one expression of
bifurcation bias) is a classic example of a biased
decision in hiring, at odds with rational economic
logic. Further, while many assume that family ﬁrms
prioritize family interests, e.g., by hiring predomi-
nantly family managers (with the exception of a
study by Burkart, Panunzi, and Shleifer, 2003),
questions concerning the conditions in which an
economic logic may prevail over a family logic have
been neglected. Experimental methods are promis-
ing for investigating this issue in the domain of
family ﬁrm internationalization. Generally, more
research is needed to investigate and test how, why,
and when family ﬁrms’ owners and managers
deviate (or not) from the bounds of rationality of
economic agents (Hoskisson et al., 2017). In this
vein,
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
scholars
could reconcile presently contrasting and/or over-
lapping assumptions about the (rational or irra-
tional) behavior of actors in family ﬁrms: for
example, under what circumstances are family
owners and managers likely to engage in steward-
ship versus agency behavior, and how do these
choices affect internationalization? How are pre-
dictions of IB theories, such as internalization
theory or the Uppsala model, affected by family
ﬁrm-speciﬁc theoretical constructs such as bifurca-
tion bias and the pursuit of SEW? Does SEW
exacerbate bounded rationality and bounded relia-
bility in host markets (and thus represent a family
ﬁrm-speciﬁc barrier to successful internationaliza-
tion), or can it safeguard against these challenges?
Do family members perceive the costs and beneﬁts
of internalization decisions differently due to their
bifurcation bias or socioemotional endowment?
Such endeavors would require researchers to
disentangle the individual-level factors of family
owners and managers that underlie the SEW con-
struct, and to explore how other behavioral con-
cepts
(e.g.,
family
owners’
or
managers’
psychological
characteristics,
biases,
heuristics,
mental models, small world representation, norms,
and values related to their family context) help
explain internationalization decisions. Therefore,
scholars
should
engage
in
rigorous
testing
of
behavioral assumptions relevant to our research
agenda; doing so will allow the ﬁeld to move from
assumption-omitted to assumption-based theory
testing (Tsang, 2006) and consequently improve
the quality and precision of theoretical predictions
regarding family ﬁrm internationalization. Testing
behavioral assumptions, however, requires open-
mindedness with methodological tools, as we dis-
cuss in subsequent sections.
Overall, paying greater attention to the micro-
foundations of family ﬁrms’ international strategy
will help scholars achieve a deeper understanding
of the sources of heterogeneity in family ﬁrms, and
ultimately reconcile the constraining and facilitat-
ing perspectives discussed above. Accordingly, indi-
vidual-level variables should be added in future
family ﬁrm internationalization studies (e.g., gen-
der; see Figure 2). Importantly, when developed
and tested, these microfoundations can be invoked
in research beyond family ﬁrm internationalization
and incorporated into broader IB studies. As such,
IB scholars have an opportunity to leverage family
business
internationalization
studies
to
further
develop the theoretical microfoundations of IB.
Family level
Despite the central role played by the family itself
in family ﬁrms’ internationalization, few studies
target the family level, a trend especially pro-
nounced in the empirical literature. Several studies
examine generation as a family-level variable (for
example, examining the probability and patterns of
internationalization in ﬁrms led by ﬁrst versus
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1181
Journal of International Business Studies

subsequent
generations).
However,
our
review
identiﬁes an urgent need to pay greater attention
to
the
family
component
of
family
business.
Diverse types of families inﬂuence family ﬁrms’
management and strategies differently (Aldrich &
Cliff, 2003). Family heterogeneity should therefore
become a key conceptual and empirical compo-
nent of family ﬁrm internationalization analysis
(Jaskiewicz & Dyer, 2017). To accomplish that, IB
scholars may turn to adjacent research ﬁelds, such
as family science and social anthropology, which
provide a ﬁne-grained analysis of families and their
heterogeneity. Jaskiewicz, Combs, Shanine, and
Kacmar (2017) propose that we should tap into
the rich descriptions of families in family science
research and present family science theories rele-
vant to the study of family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion,
like
family
systems
theory
(e.g.,
the
circumplex model; Olson, 1986, 2000), family
communication
patterns
theory,
family-niche
model of birth order and personality, parental
control theory, family development theory, ABCX
model of family stress, and intergenerational soli-
darity theory.
Social anthropology offers another illuminating
perspective on family heterogeneity. A long tradi-
tion of research in social anthropology has inves-
tigated
how
structural
dimensions
of
families
explain differences in beliefs or values of individ-
uals. Arregle et al. (2019) demonstrate how insights
on family structures, developed within the social
anthropology ﬁeld, can help link family hetero-
geneity and family ﬁrm internationalization. The
authors use Todd’s (1985) typology of family
structures to show how families’ diverse values
form the core of family ﬁrm management and can
shape international strategies. Future studies could
investigate relationships between family structures
and different aspects of internationalization. For
instance, do family ﬁrms with a speciﬁc family
structure have a higher level of internationaliza-
tion? How does family structure inﬂuence a family
ﬁrm’s international modes of entry? Do family
ﬁrms prefer to ﬁnd international partners with a
similar family structure? Is there a family structure
that leads to inferior or superior family ﬁrm inter-
nationalization performance?
Finally, with the exception of papers published in
specialized journals such as Business History (e.g.,
Amatori, 2016; Castagnoli, 2014; Colli, Garcia-
Canal, & Guille´n, 2013; Ferna´ndez-Moya, 2010),
few studies investigate the inﬂuence of family
history on internationalization. However, family
history provides an additional rich source for
understanding a family ﬁrm’s international paths
and strategies, particularly in the case of long-
standing, multigenerational family MNEs, where
the strategic imprint of past generations continues
to prevail across multiple successions (Jaskiewicz,
Combs, & Rau, 2015). Here again, an interdisci-
plinary approach may prove fruitful: family ﬁrm
and IB scholars can engage with business history
research in order to incorporate historical methods
into the study of family ﬁrm internationalization,
in line with IB scholars’ recent calls for using
history to advance IB theory (Buckley, 2016).
Macro level
A number of studies examine macro-level charac-
teristics of the ﬁrm’s host and home environments
to reconcile the mixed results on family ﬁrm
internationalization (Arregle et al., 2017; De Massis
et al., 2018). Institutional context – a country’s set
of political, normative, economic, and social insti-
tutions – has garnered the most scholarly attention,
with institutional economics theory (North, 1990)
serving as the primary conceptual lens. The effects
of formal (e.g., minority shareholders protection,
inheritance rules, and taxes) and informal (e.g.,
generalized trust, political ideology) national insti-
tutions on family ﬁrm internationalization have
been proposed and measured, as discussed above.
However, we see many opportunities to further
develop this perspective by examining other formal
and informal, home or host country institutions
such as property rights and intellectual property
protection, legal systems, employment laws, and
banking, as well as informal systems such as trading
favors, clans, and diasporas. The legitimacy of
family ﬁrms (Berrone, Duran, Go´mez-Mejı´a, Heu-
gens, Kostova, & van Essen, 2020) in a home or host
country may be key to studying family ﬁrm inter-
nationalization.10 The conﬁgurations of institu-
tions, such as the concept of national business
system (Redding, 2005; Whitley, 1992) or compar-
ative capitalisms (Jackson & Deeg, 2008), is also a
promising way to explain family ﬁrms’ internation-
alization from a macro-institutional perspective.
Curiously, the concept of institutional logics,
which are ‘‘assumptions and values, usually impli-
cit, about how to interpret organizational reality,
what constitutes appropriate behavior, and how to
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1182
Journal of International Business Studies

succeed’’ (Thornton, 2004: 70), has been over-
looked in family ﬁrm internationalization research
(Luo et al., 2009 is an exception). Institutional
logics can guide and constrain family ﬁrms’ deci-
sion makers. The relationship between internation-
alization decisions and the logics that constitute
the ﬁrm’s institutional context is important to
understanding how and why family ﬁrms exhibit
similarities and variation in their internationaliza-
tion. A key difference between this approach and
conventional country-level institutional analysis is
its acknowledgement that organizational ﬁelds are
usually characterized by institutional complexity:
they have multiple, and often conﬂicting, logics
(Greenwood, Diaz, Li, & Lorente, 2010). Even if a
dominant logic can exist (e.g., the logic of the
market), less prevalent logics may exert a localized
or weak inﬂuence, such as logics speciﬁc to a family
(Greenwood et al., 2010). The family is a central
background institution (Arregle et al., 2019)11 and
can have logics that vary, for example, across
family structures (Todd, 1985). A family ﬁrm where
the family logic pervades may make internalization
choices that differ from those of a family ﬁrm
where a market logic prevails, even if both are from
the same country and have the same level of family
ownership and management. Comparing family to
non-family ﬁrms can also illuminate how interna-
tionalization levels are affected by different insti-
tutional logics. More speciﬁcally, future research
might explicate how family ﬁrms uniquely con-
front and navigate institutional complexity in their
internationalization choices. Broader IB studies can
also
beneﬁt
from
these
different
analyses
to
advance and reﬁne their institutional perspective.
Beyond institutions, other relevant constructs
include
cultural,
economic,
and
spatial
(geo-
graphic) characteristics of the macro-environment.
Culture is sometimes equated with informal insti-
tutions and subsumed under the macro-institu-
tional banner. It is noteworthy that neither culture
nor institutions is uniquely conﬁned to the country
level: relevant institutions can be more local or
more global. For example, they can be subnational,
as a country is rarely a homogeneous entity and
often has many regional cultures (e.g., Dheer,
Lenartowicz, and Peterson (2015) identiﬁed nine
distinct cultural regions in India). Indeed, within-
country diversity is often as large as the variation of
culture
across
countries
(Au,
2000;
Fischer
&
Schwartz, 2011; Peterson, Søndergaard, & Kara,
2018). Uniquely related to the family level, a
subnational region can experience a dominant
family structure that differs from another region
in the same country. For instance, France has four
dominant family structures across its geographic
regions
(exogamous
community,
authoritarian,
egalitarian nuclear, and absolute nuclear (Todd,
2011)), with enduring effects on regional dispari-
ties. Hence, a family ﬁrm in a particular subna-
tional region can develop different international
processes and outcomes compared to another fam-
ily ﬁrm located in the same country but in another
subnational
region
with
different
institutional
features.
The urban versus rural dynamic (Tunberg, 2014)
is another macro-level dimension highly relevant
for family ﬁrms. Bau`, Chirico, Pittino, Backman,
and Klaesson (2019) ﬁnd that Swedish family ﬁrms
beneﬁt from a rural setting, where it is easier to
form alliances and build close connections with the
community compared to urban areas. Moreover,
levels of economic activity, development, and
resources are unevenly distributed across space,
with some regions enjoying an abundance of
resources while others suffer from scarcity. Given
that family ﬁrms tend to build stronger and more
durable
relationships
with
stakeholders
within
their local context
(Bau`
et al.,
2019),
spatial
distinctions are relevant to the study of interna-
tionalization.
In
this
respect,
an
interesting
research question would be to examine the extent
to which regional rural and urban contexts drive
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
strategies,
and
whether family ﬁrms in the same context (either
rural or urban) undergo similar internationalization
processes, thus introducing the overlooked urban–
rural dynamic to IB.
Another unexplored but promising avenue is the
role of industrial districts in family ﬁrms’ interna-
tionalization. Industrial districts are territorial enti-
ties characterized by specialized local knowledge,
industry concentration, and strong social interac-
tions (Cucculelli & Storai, 2015). An industrial
cluster location beneﬁts family ﬁrms. For instance,
Naldi,
Cennamo,
Corbetta,
and
Go´mez-Mejı´a
(2013) ﬁnd that family CEOs achieve higher family
ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance in industrial districts,
where social norms and tacit rules are prominent,
than in contexts like stock exchange markets,
where formal constraints and requirements are
more important. However, the impact of industrial
districts
on
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
remains unexplored. Future studies can investigate
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1183
Journal of International Business Studies

their role in sustaining active internationalization
by local family ﬁrms as well as their role in
attracting investments by foreign family ﬁrms.
Supranational regions also matter. Institutions
often have a supranational regional dimension, as
explored in the regionalization and semi-globaliza-
tion literature (Ghemawat, 2003a; Rugman & Ver-
beke, 2004). For instance, a supranational region’s
institutional complexity inﬂuences MNEs’ location
choices (Arregle, Miller, Hitt, & Beamish, 2016), but
we do not know if family MNEs react differently to
this
institutional
complexity.
The
institutional
characteristics of a supranational geographic region
– such as the European Union – can also uniquely
inﬂuence family ﬁrms’ internationalization, but
regional effects have not been widely examined
(Banalieva & Eddleston, 2011 offer an exception).
Future
studies
can
examine
the
relationship
between various aspects of supranational regions
and family ﬁrms’ internationalization.
Future work might also study the effect of such
macro-variables as family ﬁrm density or preva-
lence (the number or percentage of family ﬁrms in
a country or region, Berrone et al., 2020) on family
ﬁrms’ propensity to internationalize. Family ﬁrms
are often depicted as organizational systems in
which reciprocity, altruism, long-term commit-
ments, and collective beneﬁts assume paramount
roles.
Through
informal
interﬁrm
interactions,
these values tend to be disseminated in local
communities, thus creating an environment that
facilitates the use and exchange of resources with
the external network of local stakeholders (e.g.,
local suppliers and customers, actors in the labor
market) (Bau` et al., 2019; Bird & Wennberg, 2014;
Chirico, Ireland, & Sirmon, 2011; Miller & Le
Breton-Miller, 2005). Future studies may explore
whether increased family ﬁrm density in a given
location (either the home or host region/country)
creates
favorable
conditions
for
family
ﬁrms’
internationalization.
Industry represents another relevant level of
analysis. Industries can have their own institu-
tional logics and inﬂuence on family ﬁrm interna-
tionalization,
which
suggests
paths
for
future
research avenues. For instance, knowledge-inten-
sive industries (e.g., high-technology), which are
based
on
intensive
use
of
technology
and/or
human capital, may affect family ﬁrm internation-
alization dynamics differently, given the complex
relationships between R&D investments and family
ﬁrms (Go´mez-Mejı´a, Campbell, Martin, Hoskisson,
Makri, & Sirmon, 2014).
Cross-level inﬂuences
The four levels of analysis we propose in Figure 2
bring together complementary perspectives and
theories to explain family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion. We have highlighted knowledge gaps and
potential future research topics at different levels.
In addition, a deeper understanding of the cross-
level effects can help reveal how characteristics at
various levels impact speciﬁc outcomes of family
ﬁrm internationalization (Eddleston, Jaskiewicz, &
Wright, 2020), in terms of internationalization
levels, geographic conﬁgurations, operating mode
bundles, speed and rhythm of internationalization,
or
international
performance.
More
precise
research questions would help reconcile the previ-
ous inconsistent empirical results on the family
ﬁrm internationalization process.
We see two main potential paths forward. The
ﬁrst is to study the cross-level relationships among
these levels of analysis. Variables at the different
levels of analysis listed in Figure 2 have the
potential to be moderators. For instance, the effects
of macro-level characteristics, such as institutions,
can moderate the relationship between a family
ﬁrm’s characteristics, such as family control, and
internationalization. Arregle et al. (2017), Duran
et al. (2017), and Eddleston et al. (2019) are
examples of studies in which institutional variables
moderate the relationships between ﬁrm-level vari-
ables and internationalization variables. Mediating
effects are rarely studied in family ﬁrm internation-
alization (see Appendix 1), yet they are relevant,
especially for the study of international perfor-
mance. Here, for instance, the characteristics of
individuals, families, family ﬁrms, and/or countries
inﬂuence international strategic decisions, which,
in turn, result in international success or failure.12
The second path is to consider conﬁgurations of
variables at different levels of analysis. A conﬁgu-
ration approach, inspired by research on national
and regional business systems or comparative cap-
italism, could be used to relate conﬁgurations of
variables at different levels to explain family ﬁrm
internationalization and performance.
These approaches underscore the notion that
cross-theory integration across levels of analysis
will promote important multilevel theories and
models
in
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
research. The application of individual-level theo-
ries in conjunction with family, ﬁrm, and macro-
level theories has barely been utilized to study
family ﬁrm internationalization conceptually or
empirically.
Multilevel
models
are
the
natural
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1184
Journal of International Business Studies

method to achieve this result, but qualitative
studies and fuzzy-set methods may also advance
our knowledge of these multilevel phenomena.
Temporal Perspectives
Relationships in Figure 2 highlight the importance
of the temporal perspective in studying family ﬁrm
internationalization. Each of the four conceptual
levels (individual, family, ﬁrm, and macro) has its
own temporal dynamic, which raises the possibility
of potential reverse effects between antecedents
and aspects, or outcomes, of internationalization
(De Massis et al., 2018). Much depends on the
research time horizon. A cross-sectional study or a
study encompassing a relatively short time span
(e.g., 5–10 years) could potentially consider a
directional effect from antecedents to aspects/out-
comes of internationalization. Yet a longitudinal
study spanning, e.g., 30 years could also take into
account how a family ﬁrm’s past internationaliza-
tion (i.e., aspects or outcomes) inﬂuenced individ-
ual-
or
family-level
variables
that,
in
turn,
would help explain current internationalization.
For example, a family’s tradition or legacy could
result from the past successes or failures in a ﬁrm’s
internationalization history, as touched upon in
the review section. International education of
family executives could be inﬂuenced by the family
ﬁrm’s past international footprint. In extreme
cases, family ﬁrm internationalization could even
inﬂuence macro-level variables, e.g., when large
powerful family ﬁrms are able to inﬂuence some
local or national institutional rules or cultural
norms (Soleimanof et al., 2018). Therefore, the
relationships among variables might require more
elaborate
modeling.
Process-focused,
long-term
qualitative
studies
could
help
us
understand
dynamic
multidirectional
interactions
between
family ﬁrms, their environments, and their inter-
nationalization outcomes presented in Figure 2.
Some scholars have striven to understand family
ﬁrm internationalization strategies over time (Sc-
holes et al., 2016; Stieg et al., 2018). Interestingly,
these studies deliver results at odds with papers that
do not consider the time perspective of family ﬁrm
internationalization. For example, in their study on
entry mode choices, Xu et al. (2020b) ﬁnd that, in
the ﬁrst stage of internationalization decision-
making, family ownership increases the likelihood
of a JV versus WOS, but that, in the second stage,
family
ownership
in
family-inﬂuenced
ﬁrms
increases the likelihood of choosing WOS via an
acquisition
(versus
a
greenﬁeld
investment).
Overall, studies that do not consider the passage
of time generally predict that family ﬁrms have a
greater propensity toward greenﬁeld initiatives over
acquisitions (e.g., Boellis et al., 2016; Yamanoi &
Asaba, 2018). We agree with Yang, Li, Stanley,
Kellermanns, and Li (2018: 425) that decision
dynamics in family ﬁrms are different at different
stages of internationalization, i.e., ‘‘when the fam-
ily ﬁrm makes the decision to initiate exports
compared to the decision to increase exports.’’
Incorporating a time dimension while relying on
theoretical frameworks that allow the researcher to
make time-related predictions (e.g., mixed gamble
model, real-option theory; see, e.g., Hoskisson
et al., 2017; McGrath, 1999) has the potential to
offer deep insights into the complex family ﬁrm
internationalization process.
Methodological Opportunities
Our analysis of the literature suggests that new
empirical approaches, along with elaboration of
current methods, will further knowledge. We iden-
tify two main areas for improvement.
Deﬁnition and measurement
As aforementioned, deﬁnitions of family ﬁrms vary
in studies on internationalization. They include
different components and levels of family involve-
ment as contingency factors (Chrisman, Chua &
Sharma, 2005), explaining the different results of
studies on family ﬁrm internationalization (Arregle
et al., 2017). However, given the complex nature of
the family’s inﬂuence on the ﬁrm’s international
strategy, a deﬁnition that encompasses both family
ownership and family management is probably the
most relevant to study internationalization. Family
involvement in both ownership and management
means that the family can in fact act on its family-
centered objectives and thus trigger speciﬁc inter-
nationalization paths (Arregle et al., 2017; Hennart
et al., 2019). For instance, in order for the negative
effects of family social capital on a ﬁrm’s manage-
rial diversity and international scope to materialize,
signiﬁcant family involvement in the ownership
and management of the ﬁrm is required. Similarly,
family members must be involved in both owner-
ship and management to be able to promote their
SEW preferences or exercise stewardship.
However, the levels of family ownership and
managerial oversight also matter. It turns out that
family-controlled ﬁrms (i.e., those with unilateral
family control) suffer more from negative impacts
of family on internationalization, as compared to
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1185
Journal of International Business Studies

family-inﬂuenced ﬁrms (e.g., Arregle et al., 2017;
D’Angelo et al., 2016). However, family-controlled
ﬁrms are probably the more interesting context for
IB research: In this case, the distinctive aspects of
family ﬁrms’ internationalization are particularly
evident, helping to advance IB knowledge on non-
economic
dimensions
in
internationalization
decisions.
This example of deﬁnition-inﬂuenced outcomes
illustrates a common problem in family ﬁrm inter-
nationalization research: the weak link between a
study’s theoretical scaffolding and its deﬁnition of
family ﬁrms. Rather than trying to establish a
deﬁnition of family ﬁrms that is universally appli-
cable to studying internationalization, it is para-
mount to choose the right deﬁnition for each
particular study. The problem is that in many of the
reviewed studies, family ﬁrm deﬁnitions do not
necessarily map tightly to the theories or organiza-
tional attributes being studied, which confounds
empirical results and inference.13 For instance, a
study
arguing
that
family
ﬁrms’
stewardship
explains their internationalization needs to deﬁne
family ﬁrms in a way consistent with the central
theoretical construct: that is, the deﬁnition must
allow for inﬂuence of stewardship on ﬁrm conduct
(e.g., through the substantial presence of family
members in ownership and management). In this
case, deﬁning family ﬁrms based solely on owner-
ship (as is often the case in IB studies) seems
inconsistent with the theoretical requirements of
the
study
(Zahra’s
(2003)
above-mentioned
nuanced exploration of international scope of
family ﬁrms illustrates this point). Additionally,
such a study would need to rely on a sample of
ﬁrms with different levels of family ownership and
management and employ measures that reﬂect
those differences. However, if the theoretical ques-
tion concerns the effects of distinctive principal–
principal agency conﬂicts in family ﬁrms’ interna-
tionalization, using an ownership-based (rather
than an ownership- and management-based) deﬁ-
nition would be acceptable.
In terms of studies adopting an SEW framework,
it remains unclear which family ﬁrm deﬁnition is
best. Indeed, SEW is rooted in behavioral agency
models that were developed to explore top man-
agement team compensation. Yet, SEW-based stud-
ies of family ﬁrm internationalization assume that
the
effects
of
SEW
manifest
whenever
family
members inﬂuence decision-making – not merely
when they are members of the top management
team – and use multiple deﬁnitions of family ﬁrms.
As such, they do not take into account whether or
how the effects of SEW may differ across forms of
family ownership (e.g., ownership versus control)
or across varying board compositions or manage-
ment
structures
(e.g.,
family
versus non-family
CEO). Stronger theoretical linkages between the
SEW construct and family ﬁrm deﬁnition are
needed in order to advance such research.
Another empirical challenge is the operational-
ization of family ﬁrm deﬁnitions. What constitutes
a ‘signiﬁcant’ level of family ownership or manage-
ment has been operationalized differently depend-
ing on the type of ﬁrm (private or public) and home
country. Usually, 50% of ownership is required for
a private ﬁrm to classify as a family ﬁrm, but this
amount can be 5% or 10% for public ﬁrms (Go´mez-
Mejı´a et al., 2010). The same ambiguity surrounds
accounting for the presence of family in manage-
ment and boards, as some studies simply use the
presence of family managers and board members as
a proxy (yes/no), some use the raw number of
family managers and board members (Sirmon et al.,
2008), and still others use their percentage in the
management team or on the board (Hennart et al.,
2019; Majocchi & Strange, 2012). All of this is made
more complex when ﬁrms are located in a country
where they can issue special shares giving a major-
ity of voting rights to a family with a minority
ownership. In these countries, voting rights owned
by a family, and not its ownership per se, are the
appropriate measure (Sestu & Majocchi, 2020).
Given the cross-country nature of family ﬁrm
internationalization research, it is difﬁcult to pro-
pose the one best way to address these issues.
Variation in family ﬁrm measurement and deﬁni-
tion must be accepted as endemic to this ﬁeld, but
it remains that studies will lack robustness unless
researchers clarify the speciﬁc links among their
theoretical constructs, empirical measures, and
research contexts. Finally, using a dichotomous
variable of family ﬁrms (yes/no) has been useful in
past research, but more precise measures of family
ﬁrms’ characteristics (e.g., level of family ownership
and voting rights, importance and role of family
managers) are needed if we are to advance our
knowledge
about
these
ﬁrms’
international
behavior.
Our review shows that the two main internation-
alization variables best explained in the empirical
literature are, by far, the degree (that is, scale and
scope) of internationalization and, to a lesser
extent, entry modes. However, as aforementioned,
most studies use the ‘internationalization’ label to
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1186
Journal of International Business Studies

refer to international scale (usually measured as the
ratio of foreign sales to total sales). Yet interna-
tional scale and scope should not be conﬂated.
Some theories that predict a positive relationship
between family ownership–management and inter-
national scale, such as the social capital perspec-
tive,
also
imply
limited
(that
is,
a
negative
relationship to) international scope. Further, Arre-
gle et al. (2017) found in their meta-analysis that
the relationship between family ﬁrm and interna-
tional scale is null, yet the relationship with
international scope is negative and statistically
signiﬁcant.
Therefore,
using
precise
dependent
variables for internationalization14 to disentangle
its different facets, in accordance with the proposed
theoretical mechanisms, is an important opera-
tionalization issue15 that has signiﬁcant conceptual
consequences for future research.
One of the most striking empirical gaps is the
paucity of studies on family ﬁrms’ FDI. Most studies
focus on exporting as the de facto entry mode and
measure of internationalization; the all-important
FDI phenomenon, along with family MNEs, is
relatively overlooked. This oversight might result
from the predominance of SME samples, since
exporting is SMEs’ most common internationaliza-
tion strategy. It is important that future studies
differentiate family ﬁrm effects from SME effects,
and make sure that our knowledge on family ﬁrm
internationalization is inﬂuenced not by variables
or theories related to (non-family) SMEs, but by
variables/theories reﬂecting the uniqueness of fam-
ily ﬁrms, irrespective of size.
As mentioned, more reﬁned measures are needed
to capture SEW effects on international strategy of
family ﬁrms, particularly given the central role of
the SEW construct in family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion studies. For example, accurate reference points
for SEW need to be established in order to measure
potential losses or gains of this nonﬁnancial utility.
Further, SEW is a multidimensional construct, with
various
socio-emotional
preferences
potentially
inﬂuencing internationalization in distinct ways.
Future research should attempt to empirically dif-
ferentiate between various dimensions of SEW.
Recent attempts to measure SEW in the family
business
literature
(e.g.,
Debicki,
Kellermanns,
Chrisman,
Pearson,
&
Spencer,
2016;
Hauck,
Suess-Reyes, Beck, Pru¨gl, & Frank, 2016) have
produced divergent results. New methods will help
to address this issue. Such endeavors can contribute
to the broader study of decision-making in IB.
Methods
As mentioned above, we contend that studying
family ﬁrm internationalization requires multilevel
methods that integrate variables at the individual,
family, ﬁrm and macro levels. Such analysis offers a
more comprehensive view and promises to recon-
cile the many contradicting results in the ﬁeld by
accounting for the intrinsic heterogeneity of family
businesses and their internationalization paths.
Fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA)
could also bring new interesting insights as it can
deal with the equiﬁnality that seems to exist when
explaining levels of family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion: if family ﬁrms can reach the same level of
internationalization than non-family ﬁrms, but
with different conﬁgurations of internationaliza-
tion properties, equiﬁnality exists. FsQCA enables
us to develop or test theories that account for
causal complexity, equiﬁnality, and asymmetric
causality
in
explaining
family
ﬁrm
internationalization.
As reported by Demsetz and Lehn (1985) and
Heugens, van Essen, and van Oosterhout (2009),
family ﬁrms are not randomly distributed across
sectors and countries. This uneven distribution
could generate potential endogeneity and sample
bias distortion, which, if not properly addressed,
could bias results. Endogeneity may also exist if
variables explaining the family status of ﬁrms affect
internationalization (Hennart et al., 2019). For
example, family ﬁrms sometimes concentrate in
industry sectors or countries that, for a variety of
reasons, show low levels of internationalization.
This implies that family ﬁrms’ lower degree of
exports regularly reported by researchers could be
attributed to the industry/country concentration
and not to speciﬁc family ﬁrm characteristics. So
far, the number of studies that have addressed
endogeneity issues remains extremely low (less
than 5% of the studies in our sample). Further
efforts in this direction are clearly needed.
Our review also reveals an urgent need to address
the microfoundational basis of the ﬁeld. This
requires empirical methodologies with the capacity
to investigate the actual behavior and risk attitude
of relevant actors in family ﬁrms, such as survey
research, experiments, simulations (Felin, Foss, &
Ployhart, 2015; Kano & Verbeke, 2019), policy
capturing, games, text mining, and text analyzing.
Such alternative methodologies are rarely used in IB
and family business ﬁelds, however, they offer a
unique opportunity to study family managers’ and
owners’ cognition and motivation, and to develop
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1187
Journal of International Business Studies

formal normative models of belief and choice that
are truly representative of the reality of family
business and internationalization decisions.
Other Aspects Of Family Firm Internationalization
Research
Beyond theoretical and methodological opportuni-
ties, our review highlighted several under-investi-
gated
phenomena
that
present
interesting
IB
research avenues. First, our analysis revealed a
surprising disconnect between the basic theoretical
underpinnings of much family ﬁrm international-
ization research and its conceptualization of inter-
national performance outcomes. Although non-
ﬁnancial goals are deemed highly relevant for
family ﬁrms, most empirical studies focus on
ﬁnancial
outcomes
of
internationalization
(see
Figure 2). We are thus missing the opportunity to
investigate whether internationalization leads to
important non-economic beneﬁts for stakeholders.
Second, international corporate governance has
grown as an IB ﬁeld over the last decades. Com-
parative corporate governance is ‘‘the study of
relationships between parties with a stake in the
ﬁrm and how their inﬂuence on strategic corporate
decision making is shaped by institutions in differ-
ent countries’’ (Aguilera & Jackson, 2010: 491).
Given that family ﬁrms are the most common type
of ﬁrms throughout the world, understanding how
their corporate governance leads to different inter-
nationalization decisions across countries is con-
ceptually and empirical important. For example,
research about the inﬂuence of minority share-
holders
on
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
is
mixed. Some researchers conclude they are beneﬁ-
cial, but others (e.g., Arregle et al., 2017) suggest
that minority shareholders’ objectives can dampen
family
ﬁrm
internationalization
through
their
focus on strategies that enhance short-term ﬁnan-
cial
performance
(e.g.,
Lazonick
&
O’Sullivan,
2000). Theoretical and empirical research is needed
to better understand minority shareholder inﬂu-
ence on family ﬁrm internationalization. Family
ﬁrms
also
possess
unique
characteristics
and
dynamics related to power and inﬂuence over
decision-making. These attributes provide family
business internationalization scholars an opportu-
nity to distinctively contribute to international
corporate governance research. For example, an
important issue in international corporate gover-
nance is the non-identical nature of actors across
different
institutional
contexts,
as
actors
are
embedded within a particular setting that helps
deﬁne their identities, values, and interests (Aguil-
era & Jackson, 2010). Family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion studies can shed new light on these dynamics,
as family owners and managers are two categories
of actors who may exhibit unique fundamental
differences across countries or regions. As depicted
in Figure 2, they can be inﬂuenced by a context
made of multiple levels of analysis, including the
family level. These actors are strongly embedded in
a ‘thick’ institutional context due to the family
dimension of the ﬁrm. Therefore, research on
family ﬁrms’ internationalization across countries
can advance our knowledge of the diversity of
corporate governance actors. The variables pre-
sented at the family and macro-institutional levels
(Figure 2), and their cross-level effects, are poten-
tially the most interesting ones for such endeavor.
Third, extant literature appears silent on the issue
of international human resources management
(HRM) in family MNEs. Whereas the broader family
ﬁrm literature pays signiﬁcant attention to family
ﬁrm-speciﬁc HRM issues such as, inter alia, bifurca-
tion bias (Verbeke & Kano, 2012), altruism (Schulze
et al., 2001), amoral familism (Banﬁeld, 1958), and
engagement of nonfamily employees (Neckebrouck
et al., 2018; Ramos, Man, Mustafa, & Ng, 2014),
family ﬁrm internationalization scholars have yet
to engage with these topics. Exploration of inter-
national HRM in family ﬁrms is potentially signif-
icant
for
both
scholars
and
practitioners,
as
inherent family ﬁrm-speciﬁc personnel challenges
are further complicated in an international context
by such issues as cross-country differences in labor
laws, reward and incentive systems, workforce skills
and education, as well as by cultural distance. The
need to manage the mix of expatriates and local
employees present additional difﬁculties for HRM
in family ﬁrms. Considering the worldwide preva-
lence of family ﬁrms, this issue has important social
implications. This ﬁeld of research is virtually
untapped.
Fourth, it would be useful to further capture
family business exit or partial or total divestments
of FDI (Chirico et al., 2020; Kim, Hoskisson, &
Zyung, 2019), re-entry (Akhter, Sieger & Chirico,
2016), and temporary internationalization (i.e., a
process going from internationalization, to de-
internationalization,
to
re-internationalization;
Kuiken, 2019). Research on exit or de-internation-
alization is almost absent. To the best of our
knowledge, Kim, Hoskisson, and Zyung (2019) is
one of the few published articles on international
divestment decisions by family ﬁrms. The authors
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1188
Journal of International Business Studies

ﬁnd a negative relationship between family CEOs
and divestment of FDI, and this relationship is
ampliﬁed
for
subsidiaries
with
larger
affective
endowments. De-internationalization and divest-
ment in family ﬁrms presents a fruitful potential
research avenue, due particularly to additional
family ﬁrm-speciﬁc considerations related to affect,
path dependency, family history or legacy, and
bifurcation bias. Future studies can further investi-
gate this promising topic, which is becoming ever
more important considering today’s environment
of skepticism toward globalization and renewed
protectionism.
Fifth, the impact of family on international
strategy and structure is virtually unresearched.
Future studies can explore whether family gover-
nance is particularly effective when pursuing a
speciﬁc international strategy, as described in var-
ious IB and/or global strategy frameworks, e.g.,
integration/responsiveness framework (Prahalad &
Doz,
1987),
aggregation/adaptation/arbitrage
framework (Ghemawat, 2003b),16 or administrative
heritage framework (Verbeke, 2013). The family’s
role in navigating decisions surrounding headquar-
ters and subsidiaries, subsidiary mandate manage-
ment and resource allocation, and speciﬁc ways of
organizing the multinational network also warrant
further research.
Managerial And Social Impacts Of Family Firm
Internationalization
The various aspects of family ﬁrm internationaliza-
tion presented in this review have important
managerial and social implications. From a man-
agerial
standpoint,
this
review
has
uncovered
actionable insights related to key aspects of family
ﬁrm
internationalization,
including
leveraging
family-based resources (e.g., social capital), devel-
opment and transfer of capabilities, access to
complementary resources, business models and
strategies ideal for internationalizing family ﬁrms,
and
family
structures
and
intergenerational
dynamics, among others. We have also shed light
on family ﬁrm-speciﬁc barriers to successful inter-
nationalization, including bifurcation bias, over-
reliance of existing social capital, intra-family con-
ﬂict, and excessive focus on SEW. Close attention
to these issues can guide family ﬁrm owners and
managers, as well as family leaders, in improving
internationalization outcomes and performance.
Moreover, our
review
provides
managers with
insights on several dimensions at the family or
macro levels that can inﬂuence their international
strategic actions. At the same time, managers in
nonfamily ﬁrms could also beneﬁt from these
insights by trying to emulate some features of
family businesses that promote successful interna-
tional expansion. Further, macro-level variables
discussed in the review – in particular, regulatory
issues related to family business management –
may be of interest to policymakers interested in
making country-level institutions family business-
friendly, and in promoting the internationalization
of their family ﬁrms.
The success or failure of a family ﬁrm’s interna-
tionalization has major implications for a local
social context (e.g., a city or region) due to the
particularly strong and long-term embeddedness of
family ﬁrms in their local environments. Hence,
when a medium or large family ﬁrm’s internation-
alization derails (e.g., The Falck Group in Milan; or
ILVA in Taranto – Italy), the implications for the
local communities are often drastic (Dunford &
Greco, 2007; Salvato, Chirico, & Sharma, 2010).
Considering the large number of family ﬁrms and
their structural roles in many economies, a better
understanding of their internationalization, and
related policies (e.g., environmental), is paramount
for the general study of how business impacts
society. Future studies aimed at enhancing the
managerial and social impacts of family ﬁrms’
internationalization
(successful
or
unsuccessful)
strategies appear very promising.
CONCLUSION
Extant research has covered much empirical and
conceptual ground and improved our understand-
ing of family ﬁrm internationalization. In contrast
with earlier reviews, ours uses an IB lens to
systematize this research, highlights key contribu-
tions relevant for IB scholars, and identiﬁes theo-
retical, empirical, and methodological gaps that
should be addressed. Importantly, our analysis
suggests that the context of family ﬁrm interna-
tionalization can contribute valuable insights to
the broader IB scholarship. Speciﬁcally, greater
attention to such conceptual and methodological
issues as micro-level affective motivations, back-
ground social institutions, temporal perspectives,
and multi-level analyses is helpful beyond the
realm of family business. Insights presented here
can be fruitfully adapted for the study of other
forms of international ﬁrms. These include ﬁrms
where noneconomic motivations may factor into
international strategy decisions, such
as state-
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1189
Journal of International Business Studies

owned enterprises or not-for-proﬁt organizations,
as well as traditional MNEs and international new
ventures, which can also be subject to decision-
makers’ bounded rationality and reliability (and, as
such, biases and decision-making fallacies). Our
review shows that different disciplinary ﬁelds –
general management, IB, family business, family
science,
business
history,
and
anthropology,
among others – contribute unique angles to our
knowledge of family ﬁrm internationalization. We
believe that this complex phenomenon is best
understood at the intersection of multiple disci-
plinary and theoretical perspectives. Our proposed
future research agenda advocates a cross-disci-
plinary, multi-theoretic, and cross-level approach
to studying family ﬁrms and their international
strategy. Much work remains in terms of stream-
lining assumptions, deﬁnitions, and measures, and
we hope to see more stimulating, theoretically
grounded, and methodologically rigorous studies of
family ﬁrm internationalization in the years to
come.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Prof.
Ilan Vertinsky and three anonymous reviewers for their
valuable guidance and support. We thank Haskayne
School of Business at the University of Calgary for
funding the research for this paper through the
Transformative Research Grant.
NOTES
1With the exception of Debellis et al.’s (2020a)
and Metsola et al.’s (2020), which classiﬁed 134 and
172 articles, the scope of these reviews is quite
limited, ranging from a low of 25 (Kontinen &
Ojala, 2010) to 115 articles (Alayo et al., 2020).
2In 2018, 2019 and 2020, we considered accepted
articles published as Early View or Online First
articles. For 2020, we searched articles published
until December 1st.
3We recognize that, as a result of our search
strategy, this review includes research published in
journals with signiﬁcant variance in quality stan-
dards or impact factors. It is therefore possible that
some of the conﬂicting results highlighted in the
review could be attributed to differences in publi-
cation standards. However, it is noteworthy that
Arregle et al. (2017) found in their meta-analysis
that journal impact factors had no statistically
signiﬁcant effects on the family ﬁrm–internation-
alization relationship. Further, at the screening
stage, we exclude studies that suffered from funda-
mental and obvious execution ﬂaws. Finally, when
synthetizing ﬁndings, we gave greater emphasis to
studies published in reputable journals.
4We used the following keywords: family control,
family
ownership,
family
management,
family
ﬁrm, family business, family MNE, family group,
or family SME; and, internationalization, global/
international strategy, MNE/MNC, international
SME, global ﬁrm, foreign direct investment, mode
of entry/exit, export, scope/scale of international-
ization, born global, global/home-region orienta-
tion, global value chain, joint venture, wholly
owned subsidiary, international alliance, interna-
tional franchising, or international investment.
5To stay consistent with terminology used in
most family ﬁrm internationalization research, we
use an umbrella term ‘entry modes’ to refer to both
initial modes of entry into a host country and
subsequent modes of operating in that country,
including potential mode changes, adjustment,
and bundles (see Benito, Petersen, & Welch, 2009).
6Some studies addressed multiple phenomena; if
this was the case, we coded the study according to
what we perceived to be its dominant focus, while
making sure that we address all relevant ﬁndings in
our research synthesis.
7Bifurcation bias (Kano & Verbeke, 2018; Verbeke
& Kano, 2012) refers to a dysfunctional decision
rule in family ﬁrms, whereby family assets are
systemically viewed as valuable, and nonfamily
assets as short-term and commodity-like, regardless
of these assets’ actual contribution to value cre-
ation in the ﬁrm. Both human and non-human
assets can be subject to bifurcation bias. Not all
family ﬁrms are bifurcation-biased, but they are
inherently more susceptible to this bias than ﬁrms
with dispersed ownership.
8For simplicity, we included studies conducted
from the TCE perspective in this count, as these
studies mostly used an internationally focused
version of TCE. It should be noted that internal-
ization theory is rooted in the transaction cost
economics logic, speciﬁcally the work of Coase
(1937). Coase’s core idea – that a hierarchy super-
sedes
the
market
when
internal
organization
involves lower costs than market transactions –
was further developed in two parallel streams of
research: Oliver Williamson’s foundational TCE
work (Williamson, 1975, 1981) and internalization
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1190
Journal of International Business Studies

theory work by ‘Reading School’ scholars (Buckley
& Casson, 1976; Rugman, 1981). While these two
streams of research share Coasean foundations,
they differ in that internalization theory extends
the core transaction cost logic to explain cross-
border business exchange, while TCE is not con-
cerned speciﬁcally with the IB context, and is
therefore a general, rather than an IB, theory. Yet,
the links between TCE and internalization theory
are apparent, and some IB scholars, most notably
Jean-Francois Hennart, conduct IB research from a
transaction cost perspective. Speciﬁcally, Hennart
(1982) can be credited for explicitly linking TCE
and
internalization
theory
in
his
dissertation,
arriving at an internationally focused version of
transaction cost theory that is suitably equipped to
explain behavior of MNEs.
9We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising
this point.
10Berrone and colleagues (2020) developed a
family business legitimacy index, made of four
informal
institutions:
intergenerational
survival
orientation, continuity orientation, network-based
relations,
in-group
solidarity,
and
patriarchal
domination.
11Background social institutions, such as families,
religious organizations, or schools, exert mimetic
and normative inﬂuences on individuals (Whitley,
1992). They yield implicit, collective knowledge
based on shared social values pertaining to ‘‘how
things ought to be’’ (Calori, Lubatkin, Very, &
Veiga, 1997; Whitley, 1992).
12See Carney, van Essen, Gedajlovic, and Heu-
gens (2015) and van Essen, Carney, Gedajlovic, and
Heugens (2015) for examples explaining family
ﬁrms’ performance.
13We thank an anonymous reviewer for this idea.
14Internationalization has been measured in a
variety of ways (e.g., Foreign Sales/Total Sales,
Foreign Assets/Total Assets, Foreign Employees/
Total Employees, composition of TMT, number of
subsidiaries,
number
of
countries,
number
of
regions,
Degree
of
Internationalization
index,
entropy
index,
composite
measures,
Gravity
Model). The measurement of internationalization
has been an ongoing discussion in IB, albeit not
speciﬁcally in relation to family ﬁrm internation-
alization. Therefore, we do not explore this generic
operationalization issue in this study.
15Hennart et al. (2019) is an interesting example
of an effective approach, since the authors use a
gravity model to measure internationalization with
theories that affect both international scale and
scope similarly.
16The administrative heritage framework classi-
ﬁes MNEs into four general archetypes, each asso-
ciated with the MNE’s historical path as well as its
dominant routines for international FSA transfer:
(1) centralized exporters; (2) international projec-
tors; (3) international coordinators; and (4) multi-
centered MNEs. Most large modern MNEs represent
a combination of these archetypes.
REFERENCES
(Papers included in the literature review—see online Appendix
1— are marked with an asterisk.)
*Abdellatif, M., Amann, B., & Jaussaud, J. 2010. Family versus
nonfamily business: A comparison of international strategies.
Journal of Family Business Strategy, 1(2): 108–116.
Aguilera, R. V., & Jackson, G. 2010. Comparative and interna-
tional corporate governance. Academy of Management Annals,
4(1): 485–556.
Akhter, N., Sieger, P., & Chirico, F. 2016. If we can’t have it,
then no one should: Shutting down versus selling in family
business portfolios. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 10(4):
371–394.
Alayo, M., Iturralde, T., Maseda, A., & Aparicio, G. 2020.
Mapping family ﬁrm internationalization research: Bibliomet-
ric and literature review. Review of Managerial Science.. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11846-020-00404-1.
*Alayo, M., Maseda, A., Iturralde, T., & Arzubiaga, U. 2019.
Internationalization and entrepreneurial orientation of family
SMEs: The inﬂuence of the family character. International
Business Review, 28(1): 48–59.
Aldrich, H. E., & Cliff, J. E. 2003. The pervasive effects of family
on entrepreneurship: Toward a family embeddedness per-
spective. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(5): 573–596.
*Alessandri, T. M., Cerrato, D., & Eddleston, K. A. 2018. The
mixed gamble of internationalization in family and nonfamily
ﬁrms: The moderating role of organizational slack. Global
Strategy Journal, 8(1): 46–72.
*Almodo´var, P., Verbeke, A., & Rodrı´guez-Ruiz, O´ . 2016. The
internationalization of small and medium-sized family enter-
prises: The role of human asset quality. Journal of Leadership &
Organizational Studies, 23(2): 162–174.
*Amatori, F. 2016. The burden of the family company: Leopoldo
Pirelli and his times. Business History, 58(7): 1008–1033.
Anderson, R. C., & Reeb, D. M. 2003. Founding-family owner-
ship and ﬁrm performance: Evidence from the S&P 500. The
Journal of Finance, 58(3): 1301–1328.
*Arregle, J.-L., Duran, P., Hitt, M. A., & van Essen, M. 2017. Why
is family ﬁrms’ internationalization unique? A meta-analysis.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 41(5): 801–831.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1191
Journal of International Business Studies

*Arregle, J.-L., Hitt, M. A., & Mari, I. 2019. A missing link in
family ﬁrms’ internationalization research: Family structures.
Journal of International Business Studies, 50(5): 809–825.
Arregle, J.-L., Hitt, M. A., Sirmon, D. G., & Very, P. 2007. The
development of organizational social capital: Attributes of
family ﬁrms. Journal of Management Studies, 44(1): 73–95.
Arregle, J.-L., Miller, T. L., Hitt, M. A., & Beamish, P. W. 2016.
How does regional institutional complexity affect MNE inter-
nationalization? Journal of International Business Studies, 47(6):
697–722.
*Arregle, J.-L., Naldi, L., Nordqvist, M., & Hitt, M. A. 2012.
Internationalization of family-controlled ﬁrms: A study of the
effects of external involvement in governance. Entrepreneur-
ship Theory and Practice, 36(6): 1115–1143.
Au, K. Y. 2000. Intra-cultural variation as another construct of
international management: A study based on secondary data
of 42 countries. Journal of International Management, 6(3):
217–238.
*Avrichir, I., Meneses, R., & dos Santos, A. A. 2016. Do family-
managed
and
non-family-managed
ﬁrms
internationalize
differently? Journal of Family Business Management, 6(3):
330–349.
*Banalieva, E., & Eddleston, K. 2011. Home-region focus and
performance of family ﬁrms: The role of family vs non-family
leaders.
Journal
of
International
Business
Studies,
42(8):
1060–1072.
Banﬁeld, E. C. 1958. The moral basis of a backward society. Free
Press.
*Banno`, M., & Trento, S. 2016. International expansion of family
ﬁrms: The moderating role of successors and external man-
agers. International Journal of Globalisation and Small Business,
8(4): 292–315.
*Baronchelli, G., Bettinelli, C., Del Bosco, B., & Loane, S. 2016.
The impact of family involvement on the investments of Italian
small-medium enterprises in psychically distant countries.
International Business Review, 25(4): 960–970.
*Basly, S. 2007. The internationalization of family SME: An
organizational learning and knowledge development perspec-
tive. Baltic Journal of Management, 2(2): 154–180.
Bau`, M., Chirico, F., Pittino, D., Backman, M., & Klaesson, J.
2019. Roots to grow: Family ﬁrms and local embeddedness in
rural and urban contexts. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
43(2): 360–385.
Bauweraerts, J., & Vandernoot, J. 2019. An exploratory study on
the inﬂuence of family CEOs on tax aggressiveness in private
family ﬁrms: The moderating role of CEO gender and survival
risk. Economics Bulletin, 39(1): 636–648.
Benito, G. R., Petersen, B., & Welch, L. S. 2009. Towards more
realistic conceptualizations of foreign operation modes. Jour-
nal of International Business Studies, 40(9): 1455–1470.
Berrone, P., Cruz, C., & Go´mez-Mejı´a, L. R. 2012. Socioemo-
tional wealth in family ﬁrms: Theoretical dimensions, assess-
ment approaches, and agenda for future research. Family
Business Review, 25(3): 258–279.
Berrone, P., Duran, P., Go´mez-Mejı´a, L., Heugens, P. P.,
Kostova, T., & van Essen, M. 2020. Impact of informal
institutions on the prevalence, strategy, and performance of
family ﬁrms: A meta-analysis. Journal of International Business
Studies.. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41267-020-00362-6.
Bird, M., & Wennberg, K. 2014. Regional inﬂuences on the
prevalence of family versus non-family start-ups. Journal of
Business Venturing, 29(3): 421–436.
*Boellis, A., Mariotti, S., Minichilli, A., & Piscitello, L. 2016.
Family involvement and ﬁrms’ establishment mode choice in
foreign markets. Journal of International Business Studies, 47(8):
929–950.
*Boers, B. 2016. Go East! How family businesses choose markets
and entry modes when internationalising. International Journal
of Globalisation and Small Business, 8(4): 333–354.
Bourdieu, P. 1994. Raisons pratiques, Essais. Editions du Seuil.
Brouthers, K. D., & Hennart, J.-F. 2007. Boundaries of the ﬁrm:
Insights from international entry mode research. Journal of
Management, 33(3): 395–425.
Buckley, P. J. 2016. Historical research approaches to the analysis
of
internationalisation.
Management
International
Review,
56(6): 879–900.
Buckley, P. J., & Casson, M. 1976. The future of the multinational
enterprise. Macmillan.
Buckley, P. J., Doh, J. P., & Benischke, M. H. 2017. Towards a
renaissance in international business research? Big questions,
grand challenges, and the future of IB scholarship. Journal of
International Business Studies, 48(9): 1045–1064.
Buckley, P. J., & Lessard, D. R. 2005. Regaining the edge for
international business research. Journal of International Business
Studies, 36(6): 595–599.
Burkart, M., Panunzi, F., & Shleifer, A. 2003. Family ﬁrms.
Journal of Finance, 58(5): 2167–2201.
*Calabro`, A., Mussolino, D., & Huse, M. 2009. The role of board
of directors in the internationalisation process of small and
medium sized family businesses. International Journal of
Globalisation and Small Business, 3(4): 393–411.
*Calabro`, A., Brogi, M., & Torchia, M. 2016. What does really
matter in the internationalization of small and medium-sized
family businesses? Journal of Small Business Management,
54(2): 679–696.
*Calabro`, A., Torchia, M., Pukall, T. J., & Mussolino, D. 2013.
The inﬂuence of ownership structure and board strategic
involvement on international sales: The moderating effect of
family
involvement.
International
Business
Review,
22(3):
509–523.
Calori, R., Lubatkin, M., Very, P., & Veiga, J. F. 1997. Modelling
the origins of nationally-bound administrative heritages: A
historical institutional analysis of French and British ﬁrms.
Organization Science, 8(6): 681–696.
Cantwell, J. 1989. Technological innovation and multinational
corporations. Blackwell.
*Carney, M., van Essen, M., Gedajlovic, E. R., & Heugens, P.
P. 2015. What do we know about private family ﬁrms? A
meta–analytical Review. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
39(3): 513–544.
*Carr, C., & Bateman, S. 2009. International strategy conﬁgu-
rations of the world’s top family ﬁrms: Another factor affecting
performance.
Management
International
Review,
49(6):
733–758.
*Casillas, J. C., & Acedo, F. J. 2005. Internationalisation of
Spanish family SMEs: An analysis of family involvement.
International Journal of Globalisation and Small Business, 1(2):
134–151.
*Casillas, J. C., Moreno, A. M., & Acedo, F. J. 2010. Interna-
tionalization of family businesses: A theoretical model based
on international entrepreneurship perspective. Global Man-
agement Journal, 2(2): 16–33.
Casillas, J. C., & Moreno-Mene´ndez, A. M. 2017. International
business & family business: Potential dialogue between
disciplines. European Journal of Family Business, 7(1–2): 25–40.
*Castagnoli, A. 2014. Across borders and beyond boundaries:
How the Olivetti company became a multinational. Business
History, 56(8): 1281–1311.
*Cesinger, B., Hughes, M., Mensching, H., Bouncken, R.,
Fredrich, V., & Kraus, S. 2016. A socioemotional wealth
perspective on how collaboration intensity, trust, and inter-
national market knowledge affect family ﬁrms’ multinational-
ity. Journal of World Business, 51(4): 586–599.
*Cheong, K. C., Lee, P. P., & Lee, K. H. 2015. The internation-
alisation of family ﬁrms: Case histories of two Chinese overseas
family ﬁrms. Business History, 57(6): 841–861.
Chirico, F., Go´mez-Mejia, L. R., Hellerstedt, K., Withers, M., &
Nordqvist, M. 2020. To merge, sell, or liquidate? Socioemo-
tional wealth, family control, and the choice of business exit.
Journal of Management, 46(8): 1342–1379.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1192
Journal of International Business Studies

Chirico, F., Ireland, R. D., & Sirmon, D. G. 2011. Franchising and
the family ﬁrm: Creating unique sources of advantage through
‘‘familiness.’’
Entrepreneurship
Theory
and
Practice,
35(3):
483–501.
Chrisman, J. J., Chua, J. H., & Sharma, P. 2005. Trends and
directions in the development of a strategic management
theory of the family ﬁrm. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
29(5): 555–576.
Chua, J. H., Chrisman, J. J., & Sharma, P. 1999. Deﬁning the
family business by behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 23(4): 19–39.
*Claver, E., Rienda, L., & Quer, D. 2008. Family ﬁrms’ risk
perception: Empirical evidence on the internationalization
process. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development,
15(3): 457–471.
Coase, R. H. 1937. The nature of the ﬁrm. Economica, 4(16):
386–405.
*Colli, A., Garcı´a-Canal, E., & Guille´n, M. F. 2013. Family
character and international entrepreneurship: A historical
comparison of Italian and Spanish ‘new multinationals.’
Business History, 55(1): 119–138.
*Cristiano, E. 2018. Internationalisation and corporate gover-
nance in family businesses: A case study. International Journal
of Business Performance Management, 19(1): 75–86.
Cucculelli, M., & Storai, D. 2015. Family ﬁrms and industrial
districts: Evidence from the Italian manufacturing industry.
Journal of Family Business Strategy, 6(4): 234–246.
*D’Angelo,
A.,
Majocchi,
A.,
&
Buck,
T.
2016.
External
managers, family ownership and the scope of SME interna-
tionalization. Journal of World Business, 51(4): 534–547.
Davis, J. H., Schoorman, F. D., & Donaldson, L. 1997. Toward a
stewardship theory of management. Academy of Management
Review, 22(1): 20–47.
Debicki, B. J., Kellermanns, F. W., Chrisman, J. J., Pearson, A. W.,
& Spencer, B. A. 2016. Development of a socioemotional
wealth importance (SEWi) scale for family ﬁrm research.
Journal of Family Business Strategy, 7(1): 47–57.
*Debellis, F., De Massis, A., Petruzzelli, A. M., Frattini, F., & Del
Giudice, M. 2020a. Strategic agility and international joint
ventures: The willingness ability paradox of family ﬁrms.
Journal of International Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.intman.2020.100739.
Debellis, F., Rondi, E., Plakoyiannaki, E., & De Massis, A. 2020b.
Riding
the
waves
of
family
ﬁrm
internationalization:
A
systematic
literature
review,
integrative
framework,
and
research agenda. Journal of World Business. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jwb.2020.101144.
De Massis, A., & Foss, N. J. 2018. Advancing family business
research: The promise of microfoundations. Family Business
Review, 31(4): 386–396.
De Massis, A., Frattini, F., Majocchi, A., & Piscitello, L. 2018.
Family ﬁrms in the global economy: Toward a deeper
understanding
of
internationalization
determinants,
pro-
cesses, and outcomes. Global Strategy Journal, 8(1): 3–21.
Demsetz, H., & Lehn, K. 1985. The structure of corporate
ownership: Causes and consequences. Journal of Political
Economy, 93(6): 1155–1177.
Dheer, R. J., Lenartowicz, T., & Peterson, M. F. 2015. Mapping
India’s regional subcultures: Implications for international
management. Journal of International Business Studies, 46(4):
443–467.
*Dick, M., Mitter, C., Feldbauer-Durstmu¨ller, B., & Pernsteiner,
H. 2017. The impact of ﬁnance and governance on the
internationalisation modes of family ﬁrms. European Journal of
International Management, 11(1): 42–64.
Donckels, R., & Fro¨hlich, E. 1991. Are family businesses really
different? European experiences from STRATOS. Family Busi-
ness Review, 4(2): 149–160.
*Dou, J., Jacoby, G., Li, J., Su, Y., & Wu, Z. 2019. Family
involvement and family ﬁrm internationalization: The moder-
ating effects of board experience and geographical distance.
Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and
Money, 59: 250–261.
*Du, X., Zeng, Q., & Chang, Y. 2018. To be philanthropic when
being international: Evidence from Chinese family ﬁrms.
Journal of Management & Organization, 24(3): 424–449.
Dunford, M., & Greco, L. 2007. Geographies of growth, decline
and restructuring: The rise and fall (privatization) of the state-
owned steel sector and the trajectories of steel localities in the
Italian Mezzogiorno. European Urban and Regional Studies,
14(1): 27–53.
Dunning, J. H. 1993. Multinational enterprises and the global
economy. Addison Wesley.
Dunning, J. H., & Kundu, S. K. 1995. The internationalization of
the hotel industry: Some new ﬁndings from a ﬁeld study.
Management International Review, 35(2): 101–133.
*Duran, P., Kostova, T., & van Essen, M. 2017. Political
ideologies and the internationalization of family-controlled
ﬁrms. Journal of World Business, 52(4): 474–488.
Dyer, J. H., & Singh, H. 1998. The relational view: Cooperative
strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advan-
tage. Academy of Management Review, 23(4): 660–679.
Eddleston, K. A., Jaskiewicz, P., & Wright, M. 2020. Family ﬁrms
and internationalization in the Asia-Paciﬁc: The need for multi-
level perspectives. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management, 37:
345–361.
*Eddleston, K. A., Sarathy, R., & Banalieva, E. R. 2019. When a
high-quality niche strategy is not enough to spur family-ﬁrm
internationalization: The role of external and internal contexts.
Journal of International Business Studies, 50: 783–808.
Faccio, M., Lang, L. H., & Young, L. 2001. Dividends and
expropriation. American Economic Review, 91(1): 54–78.
Family Firm Institute. (2017). Global Data Points. http://www.fﬁ.
org/page/globaldatapoints. Retrieved from, November 27,
2017.
*Fang, H., Kotlar, J., Memili, E., Chrisman, J. J., & De Massis, A.
2018. The pursuit of international opportunities in family
ﬁrms: Generational differences and the role of knowledge-
based resources. Global Strategy Journal, 8(1): 136–157.
Felin, T., Foss, N. J., & Ployhart, R. E. 2015. The microfounda-
tions movement in strategy and organization theory. The
Academy of Management Annals, 9(1): 575–632.
*Ferna´ndez, Z., & Nieto, M. J. 2005. Internationalization
strategy of small and medium-sized family businesses: Some
inﬂuential factors. Family Business Review, 18(1): 77–89.
*Ferna´ndez, Z., & Nieto, M. 2006. Impact of ownership on the
international involvement of SMEs. Journal of international
Business Studies, 37(3): 340–351.
*Ferna´ndez-Moya, M. 2010. A family-owned publishing multi-
national: The Salvat company (1869–1988). Business History,
52(3): 453–470.
*Filatotchev, I., Strange, R., Piesse, J., & Lien, Y. C. 2007. FDI by
ﬁrms from newly industrialised economies in emerging mar-
kets: Corporate governance, entry mode and location. Journal
of International Business Studies, 38(4): 556–572.
Fischer, R., & Schwartz, S. H. 2011. Whence difference in value
priorities? Individual, cultural, or artifactual sources. Journal of
Cross-cultural Psychology, 42(7): 1127–1144.
Forsgren, M. 2017. Theories of the multinational ﬁrm: A multidi-
mensional creature in the global economy. Edward Elgar
Publishing.
*Gallo, M. A., & Pont, C. G. 1996. Important factors in family
business internationalization. Family Business Review, 9(1):
45–59.
Gallo, M. A., & Sveen, J. 1991. Internationalizing the family
business: Facilitating and restraining factors. Family Business
Review, 4(2): 181–190.
*Geppert, M., Do¨rrenba¨cher, C., Gammelgaard, J., & Taplin, I.
2013. Managerial risk-taking in international acquisitions in
the brewery industry: Institutional and ownership inﬂuences
compared. British Journal of Management, 24(3): 316–332.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1193
Journal of International Business Studies

Ghemawat, P. 2003a. Semiglobalization and international busi-
ness strategy. Journal of International Business Studies, 34(2):
138–152.
Ghemawat, P. 2003b. The forgotten strategy. Harvard Business
Review, 81(11): 76–84.
Go´mez-Mejı´a, L. R., Campbell, J. T., Martin, G., Hoskisson, R. E.,
Makri, M., & Sirmon, D. G. 2014. Socioemotional wealth as a
mixed gamble: Revisiting family ﬁrm R&D investments with
the behavioral agency model. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 38(6): 1351–1374.
Go´mez-Mejı´a, L. R., Haynes, K. T., Nu´n˜ez-Nickel, M., Jacobson,
K. J., & Moyano-Fuentes, J. 2007. Socioemotional wealth and
business risks in family-controlled ﬁrms: Evidence from Spanish
olive oil mills. Administrative Science Quarterly, 52(1): 106–137.
*Go´mez-Mejı´a, L. R., Makri, M., & Larraza Kintana, M. L. 2010.
Diversiﬁcation decisions in family-controlled ﬁrms. Journal of
Management Studies, 47(2): 223–252.
*Graves, C., & Shan, Y. G. 2014. An empirical analysis of the
effect of internationalization on the performance of unlisted
family and nonfamily ﬁrms in Australia. Family Business Review,
27(2): 142–160.
*Graves, C., & Thomas, J. 2008. Determinants of the interna-
tionalization pathways of family ﬁrms: An examination of
family inﬂuence. Family Business Review, 21(2): 151–167.
Greenwood, R., Dı´az, A. M., Li, S. X., & Lorente, J. C. 2010. The
multiplicity of institutional logics and the heterogeneity of
organizational
responses.
Organization
science,
21(2):
521–539.
*Harlaftis, G., & Theotokas, J. 2004. European family ﬁrms in
international business: British and Greek tramp-shipping ﬁrms.
Business History, 46(2): 219–255.
Hauck, J., Suess-Reyes, J., Beck, S., Pru¨gl, R., & Frank, H. 2016.
Measuring socioemotional wealth in family-owned and-man-
aged ﬁrms: A validation and short form of the FIBER Scale.
Journal of Family Business Strategy, 7(3): 133–148.
*Heileman, M. D., & Pett, T. L. 2018. Should family ﬁrms
internationalize? Evidence from the Survey of Business Own-
ers. Journal of Small Business Strategy, 28(1): 1–13.
Hennart, J.-F. 1982. A theory of multinational enterprise. Univer-
sity of Michigan Press.
Hennart, J.-F. 2007. The theoretical rationale for a multination-
ality-performance
relationship.
Management
International
Review, 47(3): 307–317.
Hennart, J.-F. 2012. Emerging market multinationals and the
theory of the multinational enterprise. Global Strategy Journal,
2(3): 168–187.
*Hennart, J.-F., Majocchi, A., & Forlani, E. 2019. The myth of the
stay-at-home family ﬁrm: How family-managed SMEs can
overcome their internationalization limitations. Journal of
International Business Studies, 50(5): 758–782.
*Herna´ndez-Perlines, F., Moreno-Garcı´a, J., & Yan˜ez-Araque, B.
2016. The mediating role of competitive strategy in interna-
tional entrepreneurial orientation. Journal of Business Research,
69(11): 5383–5389.
*Herna´ndez-Perlines, F., & Xu, W. 2018. Conditional mediation
of absorptive capacity and environment in international
entrepreneurial orientation of family businesses. Frontiers in
Psychology, 9(102): 1–14.
*Herrera-Echeverri, H., Geleilate, J. G., Gaitan-Rian˜o, S., Haar, J.,
& Soto-Echeverry, N. 2016. Export behavior and board
independence in Colombian family ﬁrms: The reverse causality
relationship. Journal of Business Research, 69(6): 2018–2029.
Heugens, P. P., van Essen, M., & van Oosterhout, J. H. 2009.
Meta-analyzing ownership concentration and ﬁrm perfor-
mance in Asia: Towards a more ﬁne-grained understanding.
Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management, 26(3): 481–512.
Hitt, M. A., Bierman, L., Uhlenbruck, K., & Shimizu, K. 2006. The
importance of resources in the internationalization of profes-
sional service ﬁrms: The good, the bad and the ugly. Academy
of Management Journal, 49(6): 1137–1157.
*Holt, D. T. 2012. Strategic Decisions within Family Firms:
Understanding the Controlling Family’s Receptivity to Inter-
nationalization. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 36(6):
1145–1151.
Hoskisson, R. E., Chirico, F., Zyung, J., & Gambeta, E. 2017.
Managerial risk taking: A multitheoretical review and future
research agenda. Journal of Management, 43(1): 137–169.
*Hsu, C. H., Kao, M. S., & Lee, L. M. 2016. The value of
internationalization for emerging market ﬁrms – Family versus
non-family ﬁrms. Economics Bulletin, 36(2): 1214–1222.
*Huesca-Dorantes, J. L., Michailova, S., & Stringer, C. 2018.
Aztec multilatinas: Characteristics and strategies of Mexican
multinationals. Review of International Business and Strategy,
28(1): 2–18.
Jackson, G., & Deeg, R. 2008. Comparing capitalisms: Under-
standing institutional diversity and its implications for inter-
national business. Journal of International Business Studies,
39(4): 540–561.
James, H. S. 1999. Owner as manager, extended horizons and
the family ﬁrm. International Journal of the Economics of
Business, 6: 41–55.
Janis, I. 1982. Groupthink: Psychological studies of policy decisions
and ﬁascoes. Houghton Mifﬂin.
Jaskiewicz, P., Combs, J. G., & Rau, S. B. 2015. Entrepreneurial
legacy: Toward a theory of how some family ﬁrms nurture
transgenerational entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Ven-
turing, 30(1): 29–49.
Jaskiewicz, P., Combs, J., Shanine, K., & Kacmar, M. 2017.
Introducing the family: A review of family science with
implications for management research. Academy of Manage-
ment Annals, 11(1): 309–341.
Jaskiewicz, P., & Dyer, W. G. 2017. Addressing the elephant in
the room: Disentangling family heterogeneity to advance
family
business
research.
Family
Business
Review,
30(2):
111–118.
Jiang, D. S., Kellermanns, F. W., Munyon, T. P., & Morris, M. L.
2018. More than meets the eye: A review and future directions
for the social psychology of socioemotional wealth. Family
Business Review, 31(1): 125–157.
*Jimenez, A., Majocchi, A., & Della Piana, B. 2019. Not all family
ﬁrms are equal: The moderating effect of family involvement
on the political risk exposure of the foreign direct investment
portfolio. Preliminary evidence from Spanish multinational
enterprises. Thunderbird International Business Review, 61(2):
309–323.
Johanson, J., & Vahlne, J. E. 1977. Internationalization process of
ﬁrm—A model of knowledge development and increasing
foreign market commitments. Journal of International Business
Studies, 8(1): 23–32.
Johanson, J., & Vahlne, J. E. 2009. The Uppsala international-
ization process model revisited: From liability of foreignness to
liability of outsidership. Journal of International Business Studies,
40(9): 1411–1431.
Kahneman, D. 2003. Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology
for behavioral economics. American Economic Review, 93(5):
1449–1475.
*Kano, L., Ciravegna, L., & Rattalino, F. 2021. The family as a
platform for FSA development: Enriching new internalization
theory with insights from family ﬁrm research. Journal of
international Business Studies, 52(1): 148–160.
*Kano, L., & Verbeke, A. 2018. Family ﬁrm internationalization:
Heritage assets and the impact of bifurcation bias. Global
Strategy Journal, 8(1): 158–183.
Kano, L., & Verbeke, A. 2019. Theories of the multinational ﬁrm:
A microfoundational perspective. Global Strategy Journal, 9(1):
117–147.
*Kao, M. S., & Kuo, A. 2017. The effect of uncertainty on FDI
entry mode decisions: The inﬂuence of family ownership and
involvement in the board of directors. Journal of Family
Business Strategy, 8(4): 224–236.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1194
Journal of International Business Studies

*Kao, M. S., Kuo, A., & Chang, Y. C. 2013. How family control
inﬂuences FDI entry mode choice. Journal of Management &
Organization, 19(4): 367–385.
Kellermanns, F. W., & Eddleston, K. A. 2004. Feuding families:
When conﬂict does a family ﬁrm good. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice, 28(3): 209–228.
*Kim, H., Hoskisson, R. E., & Zyung, J. D. 2019. Socioemotional
favoritism: Evidence from foreign divestitures in family multi-
nationals. Organization Studies, 40(6): 917–940.
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. 1992. Knowledge of the ﬁrm,
combinative capabilities, and the replication of technology.
Organization Science, 3(3): 383–397.
*Kontinen, T., & Ojala, A. 2010. Internationalization pathways of
family SMEs: Psychic distance as a focal point. Journal of Small
Business and Enterprise Development, 17(3): 437–454.
*Kontinen, T., & Ojala, A. 2011. International opportunity
recognition among small and medium-sized family ﬁrms.
Journal of Small Business Management, 49(3): 490–514.
*Kontinen, T., & Ojala, A. 2012. Social capital in the interna-
tional operations of family SMEs. Journal of Small Business and
Enterprise Development, 19(1): 39–55.
Kotlar, J., & De Massis, A. 2013. Goal setting in family ﬁrms:
Goal diversity, social interactions, and collective commitment
to family–centered goals. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
37(6): 1263–1288.
*Kraus, S., Mensching, H., Calabro`, A., Cheng, C. F., & Filser, M.
2016.
Family
ﬁrm
internationalization:
A
conﬁgurational
approach. Journal of Business Research, 69(11): 5473–5478.
Kuiken, A. (2019). Exploring the internationalization of small and
medium-sized enterprises as a discontinuous process. Unpub-
lished Ph.D. Dissertation, Jo¨nko¨ping International Business
School, Jo¨nko¨ping University, Jo¨nko¨ping, Sweden.
*Kuo, A., Kao, M. S., Chang, Y. C., & Chiu, C. F. 2012. The
inﬂuence of international experience on entry mode choice:
Difference between family and non-family ﬁrms. European
Management Journal, 30(3): 248–263.
Lahiri, S., Mukherjee, D., & Peng, M. W. 2020. Behind the
internationalization of family SMEs: A strategy tripod synthe-
sis. Global Strategy Journal, 10(4): 813–838.
Lazonick, W., & O’Sullivan, M. 2000. Maximizing shareholder
value: A new ideology for corporate governance. Economy and
Society, 29: 13–35.
Le Breton-Miller, I., Miller, D., & Lester, R. H. 2011. Stewardship
or agency? A social embeddedness reconciliation of conduct
and performance in public family businesses. Organization
science, 22(3): 704–721.
*Lehrer, M., & Celo, S. 2017. Boundary-spanning and bound-
ary-buffering in global markets: A German perspective on the
internationalization of family ﬁrms. Review of International
Business and Strategy, 27(2): 161–179.
*Lien, Y. C., & Filatotchev, I. 2015. Ownership characteristics as
determinants of FDI location decisions in emerging econo-
mies. Journal of World Business, 50(4): 637–650.
*Lin, W. T. 2012. Family ownership and internationalization
processes:
Internationalization
pace,
internationalization
scope, and internationalization rhythm. European Manage-
ment Journal, 30(1): 47–56.
*Lu, J. W., Liang, X., Shan, M., & Liang, X. 2015. Internation-
alization and performance of Chinese family ﬁrms: The
moderating role of corporate governance. Management and
Organization Review, 11(4): 645–678.
*Luo, X., Chung, C. N., & Sobczak, M. 2009. How do corporate
governance model differences affect foreign direct investment
in emerging economies? Journal of International Business
Studies, 40(3): 444–467.
Luo, Y., & Tung, R. L. 2018. A general theory of springboard
MNEs.
Journal
of
International
Business
Studies,
49(2):
129–152.
Maitland, E., & Sammartino, A. 2015. Managerial cognition and
internationalization. Journal of International Business Studies,
46(7): 733–760.
*Majocchi, A., D’Angelo, A., Forlani, E., & Buck, T. 2018.
Bifurcation bias and exporting: Can foreign work experience
be an answer? Insight from European family SMEs. Journal of
World Business, 53(2): 237–247.
*Majocchi, A., & Strange, R. 2012. International diversiﬁcation:
The impact of ownership structure, the market for corporate
control and board independence. Management International
Review, 52(6): 879–900.
*Marinova, S., & Marinov, M. 2017. Inducing the internation-
alisation of family manufacturing ﬁrms from a transition
context. European Business Review, 29(2): 181–204.
McGrath, R. G. 1999. Falling forward: Real options reasoning
and entrepreneurial failure. Academy of Management Review,
24(1): 13–30.
*Mensching, H., Calabro`, A., Eggers, F., & Kraus, S. 2016.
Internationalisation of family and non-family ﬁrms: A conjoint
experiment among CEOs. European Journal of International
Management, 10(5): 581–604.
Metsola,
J.,
Leppa¨aho,
T.,
Paavilainen-Ma¨ntyma¨ki,
E.,
&
Plakoyiannaki, E. 2020. Process in family business internation-
alisation: The state of the art and ways forward. International
Business Review, 29(2): 101665.
Meyer, K. E., & Peng, M. W. 2016. Theoretical foundations of
emerging economy business research. Journal of International
Business Studies, 47(1): 3–22.
Miller, D., & Chen, M. J. 1996. The simplicity of competitive
repertoires: An empirical analysis. Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 17(6): 419–439.
Miller, D., & Le Breton-Miller, I. 2005. Managing for the long run:
Lessons in competitive advantage from great family businesses.
Harvard Business Press.
*Minetti, R., Murro, P., & Zhu, S. C. 2015. Family ﬁrms,
corporate governance and export. Economica, 82: 1177–1216.
*Mitter, C., Duller, C., Feldbauer-Durstmu¨ller, B., & Kraus, S.
2014. Internationalization of family ﬁrms: The effect of
ownership and governance. Review of Managerial Science,
8(1): 1–28.
*Monreal-Pe´rez, J., & Sa´nchez-Marı´n, G. 2017. Does transition-
ing from family to non-family controlled ﬁrm inﬂuence
internationalization? Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
Development, 24(4): 775–792.
Morck, R., Wolfenzon, D., & Yeung, B. 2005. Corporate
governance, economic entrenchment, and growth. Journal
of Economic Literature, 43(3): 655–720.
Mustakallio, M., Autio, E., & Zahra, S. A. 2002. Relational and
contractual governance in family ﬁrms: Effects on strategic
decision making. Family Business Review, 15: 205–222.
Naldi, L., Cennamo, C., Corbetta, G., & Go´mez-Mejı´a, L. 2013.
Preserving socioemotional wealth in family ﬁrms: Asset or
liability?
The
moderating
role
of
business
context.
En-
trepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37(6): 1341–1360.
Neckebrouck, J., Schulze, W., & Zellweger, T. 2018. Are family
ﬁrms good employers? Academy of Management Journal,
61(2): 553–585.
North, D. C. 1990. A transaction cost theory of politics. Journal
of Theoretical Politics, 2(4): 355–367.
*Okoroafo, S. C. 1999. Internationalization of family businesses:
Evidence from Northwest Ohio, USA. Family Business Review,
12(2): 147–158.
*Okoroafo, S. C., & Perryy, M. 2010. Generational perspectives
of the export behavior of family businesses. International
Journal of Economics and Finance, 2(3): 15–24.
Olson, D. H. 1986. Circumplex model VII: Validation studies and
FACES III. Family Process, 25: 337–351.
Olson, D. H. 2000. Circumplex model of marital and family
systems. Journal of Family Therapy, 22(2): 144–167.
*Pe´rez, P. F., & Puig, N. 2009. Global lobbies for a global
economy: The creation of the Spanish Institute of Family Firms
in international perspective. Business History, 51(5): 712–733.
Peterson, M. F., Søndergaard, M., & Kara, A. 2018. Traversing
cultural boundaries in IB: The complex relationships between
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1195
Journal of International Business Studies

explicit country and implicit cultural group boundaries at
multiple levels. Journal of International Business Studies, 49(8):
1081–1099.
*Pongelli, C., Calabro`, A., & Basco, R. 2019. Family ﬁrms’
international make-or-buy decisions: Captive offshoring, off-
shore outsourcing, and the role of home region focus. Journal
of Business Research, 103: 596–606.
*Pongelli, C., Caroli, M. G., & Cucculelli, M. 2016. Family
business going abroad: The effect of family ownership on
foreign market entry mode decisions. Small Business Eco-
nomics, 47(3): 787–801.
Prahalad, C. K., & Doz, Y. L. 1987. The multinational mission:
Balancing global integration with local responsiveness. Free
Press.
*Procher, V. D., Urbig, D., & Volkmann, C. 2013. Time to BRIC
it? Internationalization of European family ﬁrms in Europe,
North America and the BRIC countries. Applied Economics
Letters, 20(16): 1466–1471.
*Puig, N., & Pe´rez, P. F. 2009. A silent revolution: The
internationalisation of large Spanish family ﬁrms. Business
History, 51(3): 462–483.
*Pukall, T. J., & Calabro`, A. 2014. The internationalization of
family ﬁrms: A critical review and integrative model. Family
Business Review, 27(2): 103–125.
*Purkayastha, S., Manolova, T. S., & Edelman, L. F. 2018.
Business group effects on the R&D intensity-internationaliza-
tion relationship: Empirical evidence from India. Journal of
World Business, 53(2): 104–117.
*Ramo´n-Llorens, M. C., Garcı´a-Meca, E., & Dure´ndez, A. 2017.
Inﬂuence of CEO characteristics in family ﬁrms international-
ization. International Business Review, 26(4): 786–799.
Ramos, H. M., Man, T. W. Y., Mustafa, M., & Ng, Z. Z. 2014.
Psychological ownership in small family ﬁrms: Family and non-
family employees’ work attitudes and behaviours. Journal of
Family Business Strategy, 5(3): 300–311.
*Ratten, V., & Tajeddini, K. 2017. Innovativeness in family ﬁrms:
An internationalization approach. Review of International Busi-
ness and Strategy, 27(2): 217–230.
*Ray, S., Mondal, A., & Ramachandran, K. 2018. How does
family involvement affect a ﬁrm’s internationalization? An
investigation of Indian family ﬁrms. Global Strategy Journal,
8(1): 73–105.
Redding, G. 2005. The thick description and comparison of
societal systems of capitalism. Journal of International Business
Studies, 36(2): 123–155.
*Reuber, A. R. 2016. An assemblage-theoretic perspective on the
internationalization processes of family ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 40(6): 1269–1286.
*Rienda, L., Claver, E., Quer, D., & Andreu, R. 2019. Family
businesses from emerging markets and choice of entry mode
abroad: Insights from Indian ﬁrms. Asian Business & Manage-
ment, 18(1): 6–30.
Rugman, A. M. 1981. Inside the multinationals: The economics of
internal markets. Columbia University Press.
Rugman, A. M., & Verbeke, A. 2004. A perspective on regional
and global strategies of multinational enterprises. Journal of
International Business Studies, 35(1): 3–18.
Salvato, C., Chirico, F., Melin, L., & Seidl, D. 2019. Coupling
family business research with organization studies: Interpreta-
tions,
issues
and
insights.
Organization
Studies,
40(6):
775–791.
Salvato, C., Chirico, F., & Sharma, P. 2010. A farewell to the
business: Championing exit and continuity in entrepreneurial
family
ﬁrms.
Entrepreneurship
&
Regional
Development,
22(3–4): 321–348.
*Santulli, R., Torchia, M., Calabro`, A., & Gallucci, C. 2019.
Family ownership concentration and ﬁrm internationalization:
Integrating principal-principal and socioemotional wealth
perspectives. Journal of International Entrepreneurship, 17(2):
220–248.
Schulze, W. S., Lubatkin, M. H., & Dino, R. N. 2003. Toward a
theory of agency and altruism in family ﬁrms. Journal of
Business Venturing, 18(4): 473–490.
Sciascia, S., Mazzola, P., & Chirico, F. 2013. Generational
involvement in the top management team of family ﬁrms:
Exploring nonlinear effects on entrepreneurial orientation.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 37(1): 69–85.
Shamseer, L., Moher, D., Clarke, M., Ghersi, D., Liberati, A.,
Petticrew, M., Shekelle, P., Stewart, L., & PRISMA-P Group
2014. Preferred reporting items for systematic review and
meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: Elaboration and
explanation. British Management Journal, 349: g7647.
Schulze, W. S., & Kellermanns, F. W. 2015. Reifying socioemo-
tional wealth. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 39(3):
447.
Schulze, W. S., Lubatkin, M. H., Dino, R. N., & Buchholtz, A. K.
2001. Agency relationships in family ﬁrms: Theory and
evidence. Organization Science, 12: 99–116.
*Scholes, L., Mustafa, M., & Chen, S. 2016. Internationalization
of small family ﬁrms: The inﬂuence of family from a socioe-
motional wealth perspective. Thunderbird International Busi-
ness Review, 58(2): 131–146.
*Sciascia, S., Mazzola, P., Astrachan, J. H., & Pieper, T. M. 2012.
The role of family ownership in international entrepreneur-
ship: Exploring nonlinear effects. Small Business Economics,
38(1): 15–31.
*Sestu, M. C., & Majocchi, A. 2020. Family ﬁrms and the choice
between wholly owned subsidiaries and joint ventures: A
Transaction Costs perspective. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 44(2): 211–232.
*Shapiro, D. M., Gedajlovic, E., & Erdener, C. 2003. The Chinese
family ﬁrm as a multinational enterprise. The International
Journal of Organizational Analysis, 11(2): 105–122.
*Singh, D. A., & Gaur, A. S. 2013. Governance structure,
innovation and internationalization: Evidence from India.
Journal of International Management, 19(3): 300–309.
Singla, C., George, R., & Veliyath, R. 2017. Ownership structure
and internationalization of Indian ﬁrms. Journal of Business
Research, 81: 130–143.
*Singla, C., Veliyath, R., & George, R. 2014. Family ﬁrms and
internationalization-governance
relationships:
Evidence
of
secondary agency issues. Strategic Management Journal, 35:
606–616.
*Sirmon, D. G., Arregle, J. L., Hitt, M. A., & Webb, J. W. 2008.
The role of family inﬂuence in ﬁrms’ strategic responses to
threat of imitation. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, 32:
979–998.
Sirmon, D. G., & Hitt, M. A. 2003. Managing resources: Linking
unique resources, management, and wealth creation in family
ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, 27: 339–358.
Soleimanof, S., Rutherford, M. W., & Webb, J. W. 2018. The
intersection of family ﬁrms and institutional contexts: A review
and agenda for future research. Family Business Review, 31(1):
32–53.
*Stadler, C., Mayer, M. C., Hautz, J., & Matzler, K. 2018.
International and product diversiﬁcation: Which strategy suits
family managers? Global Strategy Journal, 8(1): 184–207.
*Stieg, P., Cesinger, B., Apfelthaler, G., Kraus, S., & Cheng, C. F.
2018. Antecedents of successful internationalization in family
and non-family ﬁrms: How knowledge resources and collab-
oration intensity shape international performance. Journal of
Small Business Strategy, 28(1): 14–27.
Stieg, P., Hiebl, M. R., Kraus, S., Schu¨ssler, F., & Sattler, S. 2017.
Born-again globals: Generational change and family business
internationalisation. European Journal of International Manage-
ment, 11(5): 581–605.
*Strange, R., Filatotchev, I., Lien, Y. C., & Piesse, J. 2009. Insider
control and the FDI location decision. Management Interna-
tional Review, 49(4): 433–454.
*Suman, S. 2017. Leveraging corporate theory to examine the
internationalisation process of family businesses. Journal for
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1196
Journal of International Business Studies

International Business and Entrepreneurship Development, 10(4):
362–378.
*Sundaramurthy, C., & Dean, M. A. 2008. Family businesses’
openness to external inﬂuence and international sales: An
empirical examination. Multinational Business Review, 16(2):
89–106.
The Economist. (2015, April 15). To have and to hold. https://
www.economist.com/special-report/2015/04/16/to-have-
and-to-hold. Retrieved from, January 10, 2020.
Thornton, P. H. 2004. Markets from culture: Institutional logics
and organizational decisions in higher education publishing.
Stanford University Press.
Todd, E. 1985. The explanation of ideology, family structures and
social systems. Basil Blackwell.
Todd, E. 2011. L’origine des syste`mes familiaux. Tome 1: L’Eurasie.
Paris: Gallimard.
Tranﬁeld, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. 2003. Towards a
methodology for developing evidence-informed management
knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of
Management, 14(3): 207–222.
Tsang, E. W. K. 2006. Behavioral assumptions and theory
development: The case of transaction cost economics. Strate-
gic Management Journal, 27(11): 999–1011.
*Tsang, E. W. K. 2020. Family ﬁrms and internationalization: An
organizational learning perspective. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of
Management, 37: 205–225.
*Tsao, S. M., & Lien, W. H. 2013. Family management and
internationalization: The impact on ﬁrm performance and
innovation.
Management
International
Review,
53(2):
189–213.
Tunberg, M. 2014. Approaching rural ﬁrm growth: A literature
review. Journal of Enterprising Communities, 8(4): 261–286.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157): 1124–1131.
Vahlne, J. E., & Johanson, J. 2017. From internationalization to
evolution: The Uppsala model at 40 years. Journal of Interna-
tional Business Studies, 48(9): 1087–1102.
*van Essen, M., Carney, M., Gedajlovic, E. R., & Heugens, P.
P. 2015. How does family control inﬂuence ﬁrm strategy and
performance? A meta-analysis of US publicly listed ﬁrms.
Corporate Governance: An International Review, 23(1): 3–24.
Verbeke, A. 2013. International business strategy. Cambridge
University Press.
Verbeke, A., & Brugman, P. 2009. Triple-testing the quality of
multinationality–performance research: An internalization the-
ory perspective. International Business Review, 18(3): 265–275.
Verbeke, A., & Forootan, M. Z. 2012. How good are multina-
tionality–performance (M-P) empirical studies? Global Strategy
Journal, 2(4): 332–344.
Verbeke, A., & Kano, L. 2012. The transaction cost economics
theory of the family ﬁrm: Family-based human asset speciﬁcity
and the bifurcation bias. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
36(6): 1183–1205.
Verbeke, A., & Kano, L. 2015. The new internalization theory
and multinational enterprises from emerging economies: A
business history perspective. Business History Review, 89(3):
415–445.
Verbeke, A., & Kano, L. 2016. An internalization theory
perspective on the global and regional strategies of multina-
tional enterprises. Journal of World Business, 51(1): 83–92.
*Verbeke, A., Yuan, W., & Kano, L. 2020. A values-based analysis
of bifurcation bias and its impact on family ﬁrm internation-
alization. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management, 37(2): 449–477.
Wan, W. P., Hoskisson, R. E., Short, J. C., & Yiu, D. W. 2011.
Resource-based theory and corporate diversiﬁcation: Accom-
plishments and opportunities. Journal of Management, 37(5):
1335–1368.
*Wei, Y. C., & Tsao, C. W. 2019. Family inﬂuences in the
internationalization of the top 1,000 Taiwanese enterprises.
Chinese Management Studies, 13(1): 128–145.
Whitley, R. D. 1992. European business systems, ﬁrms, and
markets in their national contexts. Sage.
Williamson, O. E. 1975. Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and
antitrust implications: A study in the economics of internal
organizations. Free Press, Macmillan.
Williamson, O. E. 1981. The economics of organization: The
transaction cost approach. The American Journal of Sociology,
87(3): 548–577.
Williamson, O. E. 1996. The mechanisms of governance. Oxford
University Press.
*Xu, K., Hitt, M. A., & Dai, L. 2020a. International diversiﬁcation
of family-dominant ﬁrms: Integrating socioemotional wealth
and behavioral theory of the ﬁrm. Journal of World Business,
55(3): 101071.
*Xu, K., Hitt, M. A., & Miller, S. R. 2020b. The ownership
structure contingency in the sequential international entry
mode decision process: Family owners and institutional
investors in family-dominant versus family-inﬂuenced ﬁrms.
Journal of International Business Studies, 51(2): 151–171.
*Yamanoi, J., & Asaba, S. 2018. The impact of family ownership
on establishment and ownership modes in foreign direct
investment: The moderating role of corruption in host
countries. Global Strategy Journal, 8(1): 106–135.
*Yang, X., Li, J., Stanley, L. J., Kellermanns, F. W., & Li, X. 2018.
How family ﬁrm characteristics affect internationalization of
Chinese family SMEs. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management,
37(2): 417–448.
*Zaefarian, R., Eng, T. Y., & Tasavori, M. 2016. An exploratory
study of international opportunity identiﬁcation among family
ﬁrms. International Business Review, 25(1): 333–345.
Zaheer, S. 1995. Overcoming the liability of foreignness.
Academy of Management Journal, 38(2): 341–363.
*Zahra, S. 2003. International expansion of US manufacturing
family businesses: The effect of ownership and involvement.
Journal of Business Venturing, 18(4): 495–512.
Zellweger, T. M., & Astrachan, J. H. 2008. On the emotional
value of owning a ﬁrm. Family Business Review, 21(4):
347–363.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Jean-Luc Arregle is a Professor of Strategy at EM
Lyon business school, France. His research interests
include MNEs’ international strategies, the roles of
institutions, semiglobalization, and family ﬁrms.
Francesco Chirico is a Professor of Strategy and
Family Business at Macquarie Business School and
Jonkoping
International
Business
School.
His
research focuses on the intersection of strategy and
entrepreneurship with a special focus on resource
management
processes,
and
acquisition
and
divestiture strategies that affect the realization of
competitive advantage, innovation, and ﬁnancial
and nonﬁnancial wealth in family ﬁrms.
Liena Kano is an Associate Professor of Strategy
and Global Management at the Haskayne School of
Business,
University
of
Calgary,
Canada.
Her
research intersects strategic management, interna-
tional business, and entrepreneurship, with a par-
ticular
focus
on
novel
applications
of
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1197
Journal of International Business Studies

internalization theory, and on microfoundations
that underlie complex international governance
decisions.
Sumit K. Kundu is the James K. Batten Eminent
Scholar Chair in International Business in the
College
of
Business
at
Florida
International
University. His research interests are in theory of
multinational
enterprise,
international
entrepreneurship, emerging market multinationals,
service
multinationals,
and
global
strategic
management.
Antonio Majocchi is a Professor of International
Business at the Luiss Guido Carli University in
Rome (Italy). His research focuses on the theory of
MNCs, ﬁrm internationalization strategies, and the
impact of corporate governance on these strategies.
He has held visiting positions at Northeastern
University, the University of Valencia, and Fribourg
University.
William S. Schulze (Ph.D., U of Colorado) is a
David Eccles Professor in the Entrepreneurship and
Strategy Department at the University of Utah. His
research focuses on the intersection of strategic
management and entrepreneurship, with a focus
on wealth creation, learning, and the governance
of entrepreneurial and family ﬁrms.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
Accepted by Ilan Vertinsky, Area Editor, 4 March 2021. This article has been with the authors for three revisions.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation,
distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence, unless indicated other-
wise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Family firm internationalization: A systematic review
J.L. Arregle et al.
1198
Journal of International Business Studies
