Identifying Liabilities of Foreignness and Strategies to Minimize Their Effects: The Case of
Labor Lawsuit Judgments in the United States
Author(s): John M. Mezias
Source: Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 23, No. 3 (Mar., 2002), pp. 229-244
Published by: John Wiley & Sons
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3094363
Accessed: 13/02/2009 22:52
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=jwiley.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
John Wiley & Sons is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Strategic
Management Journal.
http://www.jstor.org

Strategic Management Journal 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 
DOI: 10.1002/smj.220 
I 
IDENTIFYING 
LIABILITIES 
OF FOREIGNNESS AND 
STRATEGIES TO MINIMIZE THEIR EFFECTS: THE 
CASE OF LABOR LAWSUIT JUDGMENTS IN THE 
UNITED STATES 
JOHN M. MEZIAS* 
Department of Management, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, U.S.A. 
Most foreign direct investment (FDI) theories assume that foreign subsidiaries are at a disad- 
vantage relative to domestic firms; that is, they suffer a liability offoreignness. Following this 
reasoning, most FDI research has focused on advantages foreign investors must possess to over- 
come whatever disadvantages they face. Research directly investigating the sources of foreign 
subsidiary disadvantages has been notably lacking, despite the fact that understanding disad- 
vantages could uncover ways to reduce exposure to these liabilities offoreignness and improve 
management of FDI. This study focuses on whether labor lawsuit judgments represent a liabil- 
ity for foreign subsidiaries operating in the United States (U.S.). Specifically, I tested whether 
486 British, German, and Japanese subsidiaries operating in the U.S. had more labor lawsuits 
brought to judgment than a matched sample of U.S.-owned firms. Results indicate that foreign 
subsidiaries faced significantly more labor lawsuit judgments in both federal and state juris- 
dictions. I also investigated several variables hypothesized to be associated with a reduction in 
labor lawsuit judgments facing foreign subsidiaries. Foreign subsidiaries who used American 
top officers or whose parent firms had more U.S. operations faced fewer lawsuits, while foreign 
subsidiaries using human resource professionals actually faced more labor lawsuit judgments. 
Implications of these findings and avenues for future research are discussed. Copyright ? 2002 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
INTRODUCTION 
Most foreign direct investment (FDI) theories 
assume that foreign subsidiaries face disadvan- 
tages or experience liabilities of their foreignness 
relative to domestic firms because of information 
asymmetries and transaction costs (Hymer, 1976), 
distance impeding decision making (Kindleberger, 
1969), and local biases (Vernon, 1977). Rec- 
ognizing subsidiary disadvantage, Caves (1971) 
argued that firms investing abroad must possess 
enough specific asset advantages to counter these 
disadvantages. Following this logic, most FDI 
Key words: liability of foreignness; host country adapta- 
tion; legal environment; labor lawsuit judgments; foreign 
subsidiary management. 
*Correspondence to: John M. Mezias, Department of Manage- 
ment, University of Miami, 414 R. Jenkins Building, Coral 
Gables, FL 33124-9145, U.S.A. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
research has focused on sources and types of 
advantages that foreign investors must possess to 
overcome whatever disadvantages they may face. 
While advantages, such as intangible assets, do 
affect subsidiary performance, disadvantages fac- 
ing foreign subsidiaries also affect performance 
(Zaheer, 1995; Mezias, 1999, 2000). Investigat- 
ing these disadvantages could uncover strategies 
that reduce exposure to these liabilities of foreign- 
ness and improve management of FDI. However, 
few studies document a specific liability of for- 
eignness within a focal country and investigate 
strategies that might reduce exposure to this dis- 
advantage. 
Recently several studies reported evidence of 
labor-related subsidiary disadvantage in the United 
States (U.S.) stemming from higher employee 
expenses (Mincer and Higuchi, 1988; Lipsey, 
1994) or lower profitability associated with not 
Received 13 October 2000 
Final revision received 20 July 2001 
I 

230 
J. M. Mezias 
adopting locally accepted practices (Zaheer, 1995). 
However, these studies have some limitations. 
Mincer and Higuchi (1988) compared only Japa- 
nese and U.S. firms; so, higher employee expenses 
could represent different human resource (HR) 
approaches by Japanese firms rather than a liabil- 
ity of foreignness. Lipsey (1994) focused exclu- 
sively on manufacturing firms, despite the fact 
that service firms represent a rapidly growing pro- 
portion of U.S. gross domestic product. Zaheer 
(1995) was first to tie liability of foreignness to 
the failure to adopt host country practices. How- 
ever, because she studied only firms in Tokyo 
and New York City, it is possible that this lia- 
bility is specific to these cities rather than more 
broadly applicable. Additionally, transfer pricing 
or income shifting between subsidiary and parent 
could affect her profitability measure. In this study, 
I build on this research by investigating foreign 
subsidiaries from three countries, operating in both 
service and manufacturing industries, and using 
a measure unaffected by transfer pricing-labor 
lawsuit judgments. I examine if labor lawsuit judg- 
ments represent a liability of foreignness for for- 
eign subsidiaries operating in the U.S. Specifically, 
I compare the number of labor lawsuit judgments 
against 486 British, German, and Japanese sub- 
sidiaries operating in the U.S. with the number of 
labor lawsuit judgments against 486 U.S.-owned 
firms operating in the same industries and cities. 
Using a subsample of the 486 foreign subsidiaries, 
I go a step further by examining whether foreign 
subsidiary behaviors, such as key staffing strate- 
gies, level of autonomy, number of affiliated firms 
a multinational enterprise (MNE) has in the U.S., 
and foreign subsidiary age, affect exposure to labor 
lawsuit judgments. 
Why study labor lawsuit judgments? First, it is 
important to identify how the U.S. legal environ- 
ment, which embodies legal, social, and cultural 
norms (Edelman and Suchman, 1997), can create 
liabilities for foreign subsidiaries. Second, while 
most performance measures aggregate advantages 
and disadvantages, labor lawsuits only measure 
labor-related disadvantage. Also, income shift- 
ing or transfer pricing between parent and sub- 
sidiary do not affect this measure. Thus, labor 
lawsuits provide a unique window to directly 
assess disadvantages. Third, there are significant 
costs of noncompliance with U.S. labor laws. 
Jury Verdict Research Corporation reports that 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
employee plaintiffs won 78.9 percent of defama- 
tion cases, 70.0 percent of sexual discrimina- 
tion and harassment cases, and 58.4 percent of 
wrongful discharge cases. The average jury award 
exceeded $600,000 and awards of several mil- 
lion dollars were not uncommon (Edwards, 1994). 
Legal fees for employment cases going to trial 
average $100,000 and often firms pay over 
$1,000,000 (Nye, 1995). Potentially more serious 
than legal costs are workforce disruptions, reputa- 
tional loss, and potential boycotts of nonconform- 
ing firms. Lastly, research on this phenomenon is 
sparse, which is especially surprising given that 
employee discrimination suits increased 20 times 
more than civil suits from 1969 to 1989 (Donohue 
and Siegelman, 1991). The subsequent passage of 
the 1991 Civil Rights Act and the Americans with 
Disabilities Act has likely fueled further increases. 
In this study I address two issues. First, I exam- 
ine if labor lawsuit judgments represent a liability 
of foreignness for foreign subsidiaries operating 
in the United States. Second, I examine if for- 
eign subsidiary behaviors affect this liability. In 
the following section, I address the first issue by 
reviewing literature on the U.S. legal environment 
and diffusion of accepted HR practices. I interpret 
this literature to suggest that foreign subsidiaries 
will be more likely to face labor lawsuit judgments 
than their domestic counterparts. I then investigate 
the second issue by developing hypotheses about 
which foreign subsidiaries will be most likely 
to face labor lawsuit judgments based on strate- 
gies and subsidiary characteristics. In the ensuing 
section, I describe my sample and research design. 
Then, I present and discuss the empirical results. I 
close with a discussion of implications and avenues 
for future research. 
THE LEGAL ENVIRONMENT AND 
DIFFUSION OF ACCEPTED HR 
PRACTICES 
Complexities of the legal environment pose a 
serious challenge for all organizations operat- 
ing in the U.S. especially in the area of labor 
law. Compliance with some labor laws is obvi- 
ous (e.g., minimum wage, regulated work hours), 
but other laws are more complex (i.e., the Equal 
Pay Act of 1963 and Title VII of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964). On the surface these laws 
seem straightforward, but how exactly does a 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 

Labor Lawsuit Judgments as Liabilities of Foreignness 
firm demonstrate compliance with antidiscrimi- 
nation legislation? Although these laws exert a 
strong influence on employee-employer relation- 
ships, they do not provide specific prescriptions for 
compliance or mandates for changing employment 
practices. 
Legal environment theory (Edelman, 1990,1992) 
addressed how adopting certain HR practices helps 
organizations achieve at least the perception of 
compliance with ambiguous laws. This theory 
builds on institutional arguments that societal 
norms influence both organizational structure and 
behavior (Meyer and Rowan, 1977; DiMaggio 
and Powell, 1983; Scott and Meyer, 1983; Scott, 
1983). Edelman (1990: 1402) argued that ambigu- 
ous 'law creates and helps to constitute, a nor- 
mative environment to which organizations must 
adapt.' According to this perspective, interplay 
between organizations and the public legal order 
determines which organizational practices are per- 
ceived as legitimate and become accepted (Edel- 
man, 1990, 1992). Documenting this complex pro- 
cess with respect to labor practices, Baron, Dobbin, 
and Jennings (1986) detailed the idiosyncratic evo- 
lution of bureaucratic personnel practices in the 
United States. The challenge is twofold: Firms 
must identify and successfully implement accepted 
HR practices. 
This challenge may be especially daunting for 
foreign subsidiaries. Legal and cultural norms are 
specific to nations and culture strongly influences 
laws and the diffusion of accepted HR practices 
(Edelman, 1990, 1992). Managers of non-U.S. 
operations are likely less familiar with U.S. culture 
and laws than managers of U.S. firms. Given short 
training periods and lengths of international assign- 
ments, it is difficult for expatriates to develop a 
deep understanding of their host country's society, 
culture, and workplace regulations. Yet, identifying 
and successfully implementing accepted HR prac- 
tices requires a deep understanding of legal and 
cultural norms. Additionally, expatriates may not 
be ready for the complex array of U.S. labor laws 
and regulations (Payson and Rosen, 1991). The 
fragmented nature of the U.S. legal environment 
adds to the complexity because case precedent and 
cycles of judicial progressiveness differ by court at 
both the federal and state level (Abzug and Mezias, 
1993). Consequently, foreign managers are at a 
disadvantage relative to domestic managers. 
Other factors may also contribute to labor 
problems facing foreign subsidiaries. Foreign 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
subsidiaries often use, at least initially, their 
home country business practices, which likely 
differ from accepted U.S. practices. Ewing (1982) 
argued that when society views certain practices 
(i.e., due process) as fair, not adopting these 
practices creates perceptions of unfair governance 
even if these practices do not violate employees' 
rights. If societies perceive that some foreign 
subsidiaries violate their norms of appropriate HR 
practices, this perception may create a bias against 
all foreign subsidiaries, including those using 
accepted HR practices. Perceptions of unfairness 
and biases against foreign subsidiaries, regardless 
of justification, could lead to labor lawsuits. 
Consequently, foreign subsidiaries may face more 
labor lawsuits than their domestic counterparts. 
Other things being equal, this suggests that they 
are more likely to face labor lawsuits that go to 
court and eventually result in judgments against 
them. Stated formally, I test if foreign subsidiaries 
face a disadvantage with respect to labor lawsuit 
judgments. 
Hypothesis 1: Foreign subsidiaries face more 
labor lawsuit judgments than their domestic 
counterparts. 
REDUCING EXPOSURE TO LABOR 
LAWSUIT JUDGMENTS 
Foreign subsidiary staffing strategies 
I have argued that foreign subsidiaries experience 
a liability of foreignness with respect to labor law- 
suit judgments. It is important to take the next step 
to examine which staffing strategies might help 
foreign subsidiaries reduce their exposure to labor 
lawsuit judgments. As mentioned above, both iden- 
tifying and implementing accepted HR practices is 
a crucial task that requires a deep understanding of 
legal and cultural norms. Americans likely have 
a better understanding of U.S. legal and cultural 
norms and have more experience working with 
U.S. employees. Foreign subsidiaries with Ameri- 
cans in charge of HR issues may benefit from their 
deeper understanding of norms and their experi- 
ence with U.S. employees. Subsidiaries with expa- 
triates in charge of HR issues miss out on these 
benefits and may be at a disadvantage identifying 
and implementing accepted HR practices. Conse- 
quently, subsidiaries with expatriates in charge of 
HR issues may face more labor lawsuits. Stated 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 
231 

232 
J. M. Mezias 
formally, I test whether foreign subsidiaries with 
an American in charge of HR issues face fewer 
labor lawsuit judgments. 
Hypothesis 2: Foreign subsidiaries with Amer- 
icans in charge of HR issues face fewer labor 
lawsuit judgments than subsidiaries with expa- 
triates in charge of HR issues. 
A separate issue is whether foreign subsidiaries 
use an HR professional instead of a functional or 
departmental manager to handle HR issues in addi- 
tion to their other duties. Past research has shown 
that HR professionals played an important role in 
the complex evolution of modem U.S. personnel 
practices (Baron et al., 1986). Indeed, Edelman 
(1990, 1992) found that personnel professionals' 
networks and mobility correlated highly with the 
diffusion of legitimizing organizational practices. 
Foreign subsidiaries with HR professionals may 
benefit from their previous experience and net- 
work connections and, thus, may be better able 
to identify and implement accepted HR practices. 
Consequently, HR professionals may help foreign 
subsidiaries reduce their exposure to this liability. 
Stated formally, I test whether foreign subsidiaries 
with HR professionals face fewer labor lawsuit 
judgments. 
Hypothesis 3a: Foreign subsidiaries with HR 
professionals face fewer labor lawsuit judg- 
ments 
than 
subsidiaries 
without 
HR 
professionals. 
While past theory and research suggest that 
HR professionals could help foreign subsidiaries 
reduce exposure to labor lawsuit judgments, it is 
important to note the potential for reverse causa- 
tion in this relationship. That is, a foreign sub- 
sidiary may only hire an HR professional if it 
is having labor problems. Given the lag time in 
filing and resolution of labor lawsuits, it might 
appear that those foreign subsidiaries with HR pro- 
fessionals actually experience more labor lawsuit 
judgments. This 'hire to put out the fire' strat- 
egy may result in findings opposite to what was 
predicted in Hypothesis 3a. Therefore, I test a com- 
peting hypothesis. Stated formally, I test whether 
having an HR professional will be associated with 
a greater number of labor lawsuit judgments. 
Hypothesis 3b: Foreign subsidiaries with HR 
professionals face more labor lawsuit judgments 
than subsidiaries without HR professionals. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Although HR professionals are trained to deal 
with labor problems, hiring an HR professional 
may not be sufficient to reduce labor lawsuits judg- 
ments. HR professionals often lack the managerial 
discretion to significantly change practices, espe- 
cially if those practices are used successfully by 
their parent firms. Perhaps changing HR practices 
and influencing implementation requires the sup- 
port and understanding from those higher in the 
hierarchy. To understand more fully the effect of 
staffing strategies on labor lawsuit judgments, it 
is necessary to examine who is the top officer at 
these foreign subsidiaries. There is extensive litera- 
ture on top officers influencing their organizations' 
actions (Barnard, 1938; Andrews, 1971; Hambrick 
and Mason, 1984; Hambrick, 1989). American top 
officers are more familiar with U.S. cultural and 
legal norms than expatriate top officers are. Con- 
sequently, having an American top officer could 
help a foreign subsidiary identify and especially 
implement accepted HR practices that may reduce 
labor lawsuit judgments. Stated formally, I test 
whether having an American top officer reduces 
the number of labor lawsuit judgments foreign sub- 
sidiaries face. 
Hypothesis 4: Foreign subsidiaries with Amer- 
ican top officers face fewer labor lawsuit judg- 
ments than subsidiaries with expatriate top 
officers. 
Subsidiary/parent relationship 
All subsidiaries face conflicting pressure to main- 
tain internal consistency with their parent's orga- 
nizational practices and to adapt locally (Prahalad 
and Doz, 1987; Evans and Doz, 1989; Bartlett 
and Ghoshal, 1989). Although Kerr et al. (1960) 
argued that management practices were becom- 
ing more similar globally, Dunlop et al. (1975) 
concluded that total convergence was impossi- 
ble because of the social, political, and cultural 
diversity of managerial approaches. The level of 
adaptation to host country practices likely depends 
on the level of autonomy given foreign sub- 
sidiaries. A key issue in autonomy is the chain 
of reporting among operations in an MNE. Fay- 
erweather (1969) discussed how 'communication 
gaps' between parent and subsidiary may inhibit a 
foreign subsidiary's ability to respond quickly and 
effectively to host country problems. Bartlett and 
Ghoshal (1989) specifically tied communication 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 

Labor Lawsuit Judgments as Liabilities of Foreignness 
gaps to autonomy levels of subsidiary managers. 
Greater autonomy from parent firms, which are 
likely less in tune with host country norms and 
practices than the foreign subsidiary's managers 
are, may facilitate foreign subsidiary adaptation to 
local conditions. Indeed, some MNEs may pro- 
vide greater autonomy to encourage subsidiaries 
to adopt local practices. Stated formally, I test if 
greater autonomy from parent firms reduces the 
number of labor lawsuit judgments foreign sub- 
sidiaries face. 
Hypothesis 5: Foreign subsidiaries with greater 
autonomy from their parents face fewer labor 
lawsuit judgments. 
Extent of a MNE's involvement in the host 
country 
Recent research suggests that subsidiaries of 
MNEs with more affiliated U.S. operations were 
more likely to survive (Shaver, Mitchell, and 
Yeung, 1997) and expand (Hennart and Park, 
1994). Other studies found evidence of learn- 
ing and diffusion of innovation across a network 
of affiliated organizations (Argote, Beckman, and 
Epple, 1990; Cool, Dierickx, and Szulanski, 1997). 
An affiliated network may be a foreign subsidiary's 
best opportunity for vicarious learning; that is, 
learning from the experience of others (Miner and 
Mezias, 1996). The argument is straightforward: It 
is easier to identify and understand successful prac- 
tices of affiliated firms than the practices of unaf- 
filiated domestic firms. This organizational learn- 
ing argument suggests that affiliated foreign sub- 
sidiaries may benefit from learning and diffusion 
related to identifying and implementing accepted 
HR practices. There is also an institutional argu- 
ment why foreign subsidiaries affiliated with more 
U.S. operations might be less likely to experience 
labor lawsuit judgments: They have higher pro- 
files and are more visible. Greater visibility may 
result in greater care to be in compliance because 
more visible foreign subsidiaries are more vul- 
nerable to normative pressures (Edelman, 1990). 
Both arguments suggest that more host country 
affiliations may reduce labor lawsuit judgments. 
Stated formally, I test if having more affiliated 
U.S. operations reduces the number of labor law- 
suit judgments foreign subsidiaries face. 
Hypothesis 6: Foreign subsidiaries of parent 
firms with numerous U.S. operations face fewer 
labor lawsuit judgments. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Organizational age has long been an impor- 
tant predictor of population vital rates. Following 
Stinchcombe (1965), the predominant view of the 
effect of age, supported by considerable empiri- 
cal evidence (Baum, 1996), has been a liability 
of newness: Young organizations are at a survival 
disadvantage. This ecological argument is con- 
sistent with an organizational learning argument 
that lack of experience and learning opportuni- 
ties put younger firms at a disadvantage. While 
affiliation with numerous subsidiaries may facili- 
tate vicarious learning, age may be a measure of 
experiential learning; that is, the extent to which 
firms learn from their own experience (Miner and 
Mezias, 1996). Thus, older foreign subsidiaries 
may have learned to minimize their exposure to 
labor lawsuit judgments. There is also a pure selec- 
tion argument why older foreign subsidiaries may 
face fewer labor lawsuit judgments: Younger for- 
eign subsidiaries with numerous labor problems 
may decide to shut down host country operations. 
So, both a learning and selection argument would 
suggest that older firms would experience fewer 
labor lawsuit judgments. Stated formally, I test if 
increased age reduces the number of labor lawsuit 
judgments foreign subsidiaries face. 
Hypothesis 7: Older foreign subsidiaries face 
fewer labor lawsuit judgments. 
EMPIRICAL 
SETTING 
Sample description 
The foreign half of the sample consists of 486 
British, German, and Japanese subsidiaries. By for- 
eign subsidiary I am referring to any host coun- 
try operation (e.g., sales offices, branch offices, 
plants, or local headquarters) controlled by a for- 
eign parent. I identified foreign subsidiaries using 
the Subsidiaries of German Firms in the U.S., the 
Directory of Japanese Affiliated Companies in the 
U.S.A. and Canada, and the U.K./U.S.A. Directory: 
A Directory of Bilateral Investment. The industries 
represented include both service and manufactur- 
ing and span numerous Standard Industrial Classi- 
fication (SIC) codes. The second half of the sample 
consists of 486 U.S. firms operating in the same 4- 
digit SIC code and in the same location as the for- 
eign subsidiaries. For example, if three Japanese, 
two German, and four British-owned hotels oper- 
ating in San Francisco were included among the 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 
233 

234 
J. M. Mezias 
foreign subsidiaries, then nine U.S.-owned hotels 
were randomly selected from the total population 
of U.S.-owned hotels operating in San Francisco. 
The four locations satisfy several important 
selection criteria. First, while anecdotal evidence 
suggests that foreign subsidiaries have location 
biases, Shaver (1998) found differences in the loca- 
tion patterns of foreign and U.S.-owned manu- 
facturing firms in the United States. He ranked 
states according to foreign subsidiaries' location 
preferences. For the states included in my sam- 
ple, Georgia was most favored, Illinois was mod- 
erately favored, California was moderately dis- 
favored, and New York was highly disfavored. 
Sampling from these locations provides variance 
on factors not directly measured, e.g., right to 
work legislation, average wage rates, and unioniza- 
tion. The intention is to prevent spurious findings 
linked to those factors. Second, federal district 
courts have jurisdiction over specific geographic 
regions corresponding to groups of states. Because 
legal application and interpretation vary across 
courts and judges, selecting locations under dif- 
ferent federal district court jurisdictions affords a 
more diversified national test of these hypotheses. 
Obviously, these locations also provide state-level 
jurisdictional diversity. Sampling from a single 
metropolitan area within each state avoids prob- 
lems associated with intrastate jurisdictional dif- 
ferences. For example, New York State has 1076 
different courts. Third, selected locations need suf- 
ficient British, German, and Japanese subsidiaries 
to ensure a large enough sample. Based on these 
criteria, the Atlanta, Chicago, New York City, 
and San Francisco metropolitan regions were the 
chosen locations. 
Testing my hypotheses requires tying each judg- 
ment to the specific organization generating the 
dispute. This allows me to track which staffing 
strategies, practices, and characteristics are asso- 
ciated with that labor lawsuit judgment. Court 
jurisdiction provides an easy way to identify the 
focal organization generating the dispute in a par- 
ticular metropolitan area. However, this is prob- 
lematic when organizations in a metropolitan area 
have the exact same name, most notably branch 
offices of banks. Because litigants' addresses are 
not provided, it is almost impossible to identify 
which of these same-named organizations gener- 
ated the dispute leading to a judgment. Accord- 
ingly, I excluded all same-named organizations 
operating in the same metropolitan area. I also 
excluded foreign subsidiaries with fewer than 10 
employees because these smaller operations likely 
use mostly expatriates. Expatriates would be reluc- 
tant to air grievances with their parent company or 
its subsidiary operations in a host country forum 
such as the U.S. courts (Clermont and Eisenberg, 
1996). 
Originally, I identified 549 foreign subsidiaries; 
of these, 3 moved outside their original metropoli- 
tan area, 8 went out of business, 1 was acquired, 
and 51 were unreachable. Consequently, these 63 
subsidiaries were dropped; the remaining 486 sub- 
sidiaries comprised the sample to test Hypothe- 
sis 1. Table 1 depicts their national origin and 
metropolitan locations; there is a matched U.S. 
firm for each foreign subsidiary in the analysis to 
test Hypothesis 1. To obtain some of the data to 
test Hypotheses 2 through 7, I created a survey 
and sent it to each foreign subsidiary. Initially, 
192 foreign subsidiaries responded and 64 more 
responded when I re-sent the survey, yielding 256 
foreign subsidiaries and a response rate of approxi- 
mately 53 percent. However, missing items left me 
with only 176 usable surveys; as a result, the sam- 
ple size for models testing Hypotheses 2 through 
7 was 176. 
Dependent variables 
While performance measures, such as profits or 
return on investment, aggregate a firm's advan- 
tages and disadvantages, labor lawsuit judgments 
Table 1. Foreign subsidiaries by national origin and metropolitan area 
Atlanta 
Chicago 
New York 
San Francisco 
Totals 
Germany 
15 
4 
43 
5 
67 
Japan 
38 
29 
122 
44 
233 
United Kingdom 
23 
17 
134 
12 
186 
Totals 
76 
50 
299 
61 
486 
The U.S. firms selected identically match this locational distribution. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 
(2002) 

Labor Lawsuit Judgments as Liabilities of Foreignness 
directly measure only the disadvantages. Addi- 
tionally, accounting techniques such as transfer 
pricing or income shifting between parent and 
subsidiary cannot manipulate this measure, which 
is an important concern when assessing foreign 
subsidiary performance. Thus, labor lawsuit judg- 
ments provide a unique window to assess directly 
a liability of foreignness. I use two dependent 
variables to track labor lawsuit judgments brought 
against each firm. One is the count of labor law- 
suit judgments brought in federal courts, and the 
other is the count of those brought in state courts. 
Tracking both federal and state judgments provides 
a more comprehensive assessment of whether for- 
eign subsidiaries operating in the U.S. face a lia- 
bility of foreignness with respect to labor lawsuit 
judgments. Since my hypotheses are tied to the 
activities at specific subsidiary locations, I count 
only labor lawsuit judgments from courts with 
jurisdiction in the focal firm's specific location: 
either Atlanta, Chicago, New York City, or San 
Francisco. 
Why use labor lawsuit judgments rather than 
simply counting labor lawsuit filings? Unfortu- 
nately, records of lawsuits filed are only broken 
down into two categories: civil and criminal. In 
addition to labor lawsuits, civil filings include 
product liability, contract disputes, patent infringe- 
ments, insurance, securities, antitrust, and a host 
of other types of civil actions. Since civil filings 
are commingled, it is extremely difficult to dis- 
aggregate labor lawsuit filings from other civil 
filings and in many cases this is not possible. 
Consequently, it does not seem reasonable to use 
civil lawsuit filings to test labor-related hypotheses 
because the count would include different types of 
civil actions. In addition, using labor lawsuit judg- 
ments provides a conservative test of the hypoth- 
esis of liability of foreignness. Evidence strongly 
suggests that foreigners are much more likely to 
settle or abandon U.S. lawsuits rather than liti- 
gate. Based on their study of more than 94,000 
federal lawsuits from 1987 to 1994, Clermont and 
Eisenberg (1996: 1133-1134) concluded that for- 
eign firms: 
... are reluctant to litigate in American courts for a 
variety of reasons, including the apprehension that 
American courts exhibit xenophobic bias and the 
pecuniary and non-pecuniary distastes for litigating 
in a distant place. 
Of course, it is this reluctance to litigate as 
defendants that is most relevant: They specifically 
argue that foreign subsidiaries satisfy most claims 
prior to going to litigation. Since foreigners are 
more likely to satisfy claims before they come 
to judgment, any bias or endogeneity stemming 
from a potential settlement bias works in favor 
of the null hypothesis. Thus, testing if foreign 
subsidiaries face more labor lawsuit judgments is 
a conservative test. 
Although filing procedures for federal courts 
are not appreciably different from those for state 
courts, there are key differences that influence a 
litigant's choice of jurisdiction. Federal statutes 
can create rights, such as family-leave legislation, 
unavailable in some states. If you work in a state 
without an equivalent statute, then you must file 
family-leave lawsuits in federal court. Lawsuits 
with parties from different states also fall under 
federal jurisdiction. In addition, remedies in federal 
and state courts may differ substantially. For exam- 
ple, federal courts limit punitive damages under 
Title VII to $300,000, while California does not 
limit punitive damages for suits filed under its 
equivalent statute. Federal and state courts also dif- 
fer in terms of who decides cases; for example, 
until recently there was no right to a jury trial in 
Title VII federal suits. Similarly, federal jury ver- 
dicts require a unanimous vote of all six jurors, 
while California jury verdicts require only nine 
of twelve jurors. In addition to these differences 
between federal and state courts, the fragmented 
nature of the U.S. legal environment creates vari- 
ance in cycles of progressiveness and case prece- 
dent across courts (Abzug and Mezias, 1993). For 
all of these reasons, it is necessary to analyze fed- 
eral and state labor lawsuit judgments separately. 
At the same time, examining both provides a more 
comprehensive test of this liability of foreignness. 
I used the Labor Library of Lexis-Nexis to track 
labor judgments. This library documents all labor 
lawsuit judgments against firms except for rare 
cases in which the judge does not allow the judg- 
ment to be made available. I also used The Ameri- 
can Bench (Finn, 1996), a reference source for all 
U.S. courts, to identify federal and state courts with 
jurisdiction over the selected metropolitan areas. 
The period of analysis is 1995-96 because detailed 
data on foreign subsidiaries, specifically subsidiary 
size data, have only recently become available and 
are not available on a consistent basis. I use two 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
235 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 
(2002) 

236 
J. M. Mezias 
dependent variables to track the number of labor 
lawsuit judgments: 
* Federal is the count of federal labor lawsuit 
judgments against a firm in 1995 and 1996. 
* State is the count of state labor lawsuit judg- 
ments against a firm in 1995 and 1996. 
Independent variables 
Most data on foreign subsidiaries came from the 
British, German, and Japanese chambers of com- 
merce and trade. Some data came from the Direc- 
tory of Corporate Affiliations and some data came 
from the Lexis-Nexis state incorporation database 
files and the American Business Information file. 
A survey instrument provided data on foreign sub- 
sidiary staffing strategies and it supplemented data 
on number of employees, number of affiliated U.S. 
offices, and subsidiary reporting requirements. The 
list of the independent variables follows: 
* Foreign is a dummy variable representing if 
the focal firm is foreign or domestic. Foreign 
subsidiaries were coded 1 and U.S. firms were 
coded 0. 
* USHR is a dummy variable representing if the 
focal subsidiary has an American in charge of 
HR issues. Those using Americans were coded 
1 and those using expatriates were coded 0. 
* HRPro is a dummy variable representing if the 
focal subsidiary's officer in charge of HR issues 
is an HR professional. If HR or Personnel is 
part of this officer's title, then the variable was 
coded 1, if not the variable was coded 0. 
* USTopExec is a dummy variable representing 
if the focal subsidiary has had an American 
top officer (titles vary from CEO, President, 
to Chairman). Subsidiaries with American top 
officers were coded 1 and subsidiaries with 
expatriate top officers were coded 0. 
* ReportUS is a dummy variable reflecting the 
reporting chain of command for the focal sub- 
sidiary. Subsidiaries reporting directly to an 
affiliated U.S. operation were coded 1 and sub- 
sidiaries reporting directly to its parent were 
coded 0. 
* USOffices is the total number of affiliated U.S. 
operations of the focal subsidiary's parent. 
* Age represents the number of years the focal 
firm has operated in the particular metropolitan 
location, rounded to the nearest year. 
Control variables 
Although I do not offer substantive hypotheses for 
these variables, it is important to control for the 
effects of size and location. Only three of the four 
location variables could be included in the analy- 
sis. I included them based on alphabetical order, 
leaving San Francisco as the excluded category. 
Table 2 reports correlations and descriptive statis- 
tics. The following are the control variables: 
* Size represents the total number of employees 
working in the focal firm. 
* Atlanta represents firms located in the Atlanta 
metropolitan area, which were coded 1 and all 
other firms were coded 0. 
* Chicago represents firms located in the Chicago 
metropolitan area, which were coded 1 and all 
other firms were coded 0. 
* New York represents firms located in the New 
York City metropolitan area, which were coded 
1 and all other firms were coded 0. 
Estimation method 
These dependent variables are counts of rare 
events. Using ordinary least-squares regression on 
this type of data would provide unbiased esti- 
mation, but would be less efficient than estima- 
tion techniques designed for limited dependent 
variables. A Poisson process is designed specif- 
ically for limited dependent variables and pro- 
vides more efficient estimation than ordinary least- 
squares regression for such data. In addition, count 
data is bound from below (i.e., zero); therefore, 
a firm cannot have a negative count of lawsuits. 
However, using ordinary least-squares regression 
could yield a negative count estimation, which 
is meaningless in terms of practical interpreta- 
tion. Accordingly, I use the Poisson process as 
the baseline model (Maddala, 1984). These models 
are commonly used to study patents (e.g., Zucker, 
Darby, and Armstrong, 1998; Wang, Cockburn, 
and Puterman, 1998), organizational founding rates 
(e.g., Ranger-Moore, Banaszak-Holl, and Hannan, 
1989, 1991; Mezias and Mezias, 2000), and FDI 
entries (e.g., Kogut and Chang, 1991; Anand and 
Kogut, 1997). 
The basic Poisson model for event count data is 
the following: 
Pr(Yt = y) = e-X(Xit)[X(Xi,)/y!], y = 0, 1, 2,.... 
(1) 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 
(2002) 

0 ~0 
tQ Table 2. Correlation matrix and descriptive statistics 
0 
0 
Variable 
1 
2 
3 
1D Federal 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
2 State 
0.308** 
1 
(972) 
3 Foreign 
0.069* 
0.131** 1 
(972) 
(972) 
4 USHR 
0.044 
0.074 
1 
(248) 
(248) 
S HRPro 
0. 175** 
0. 190** 
0.229** 1 
(224) 
(224) 
1 
6 USTopExec 
0.220 
0.013 
0.268** 0.118 
1 
(236) 
(236) 
(231) 
(207) 
7 ReportUS 
-0.033 
-0.034 
0. 152* 
0.056 
0.283** 1 
(306) 
(306) 
(222) 
(200) 
(210) 
8 USOffices 
-0.020 
-0.035 
0. 139* 
0.051 
0.087 
0. 1 87** 
1 
(245) 
(245) 
(237) 
(215) 
(228) 
(220) 
9 Age 
0.024 
0.000 
-0.060 
0.022 
-0.055 
-0.066 
-0.062 
0.096 
(972) 
(972) 
(972) 
(248) 
(224) 
(236) 
(306) 
(245) 
1 0 Size 
0. 163** 
0.162** -0.017 
0. 170** 0.348** 0. 185** -0.023 
0.109 
(972) 
(972) 
(972) 
(248) 
(224) 
(236) 
(306) 
(245) 
1 1 Atlanta 
-0.037 
-0.059 
0.000 
0.073 
0.048 
0. 130* 
0. 112* 
0.037 
(972) 
(972) 
(972) 
(248) 
(224) 
(236) 
(306) 
(245) 
12 Chicago 
-0.013 
-0.043 
0.000 
-0.123 
0. 135* 
0.043 
0. 152** 
0.038 
(972) 
(972) 
(972) 
(248) 
(224) 
(236) 
(306) 
(245) 
13 New York 
0.071* 
0. 108** 0.000 
-0.102 
-0.047 
-0.095 
-0.300** 
-0.056 
(972) 
(972) 
(972) 
(248) 
(224) 
(236) 
(306) 
(245) 
14 San Francisco 
-0.052 
-0.055 
0.000 
-0.044 
-0.105 
0.046 
0.181** 
0.006 
(972) 
(972) 
(972) 
(248) 
(224) 
(236) 
(306) 
(245) 
Mean 
0.07 
0.10 
0.50 
0.82 
0.38 
0.62 
0.32 
16.89 
S.D. 
0.51 
0.65 
0.50 
0.39 
0.49 
0.49 
0.47 
29.42 
Minimum 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
Maximum 
1 3 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
200 
0.056 
(972) 
-0.038 
(972) 
0.007 
(972) 
0.057 
(972) 
-0.049 
(972) 
21.08 
15.66 
2 
106 
-0.076*
(972) 
-0.023 
(972) 
0.099*
(972) 
-0.042 
(972) 
112.84 
331.36 
10 
6000 
--- ----------- 
w 
w 
t--l-) 
t'.) IC 
p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; (n) 
I 
t'li 
.41. 
8 t'i 
l< 
R. 
C/) 
0 
r 
p- 
co 
0*- 
I 

238 
J. M. Mezias 
where X is the rate at which events occur. This is 
a function of the matrix of independent variables 
Xi, where i = the ith independent variable and 
t = time. The Poisson distribution of Equation (1) 
has expected value and variance of 
E[Y,] = VAR[Y,] = -Xit 
This model assumes that the expected number of 
events and the variance of the expected number of 
events equal the rate at which events occur, XXi,. 
This parameter is estimated using the values of Xi, 
to predict X, in the following equation: X, = e(Xt)?t. 
Some count data can be heterogeneous, which 
would violate the assumption of equal mean and 
variance. Tracing their argument back to Green- 
wood and Yule (1920), Ranger-Moore et al. (1991) 
recommended using the negative binomial regres- 
sion model to correct for violations of this assump- 
tion. The negative binomial model has a scaling 
parameter to deal with unexplained heterogeneity 
or overdispersion, and it offers a more efficient 
estimation than the Poisson model when dealing 
with heterogeneous data. Like the Poisson model, 
the negative binomial is a generalized linear model 
that provides more efficient estimations for count 
data than ordinary least-squares regression. I used 
LIMDEP (Greene, 1989) software for the analysis 
because it estimates both the Poisson and negative 
binomial models. For all analyses, both models 
were run to see if the negative binomial offered 
any improvement over the Poisson model. 
RESULTS 
Table 3 reports negative binomial regression 
results of a federal and a state model testing 
Hypothesis 1. In both models, the alpha variable 
was significant, suggesting overdispersion in the 
data; accordingly, negative binomial regression 
was used. Both models included a constant, a 
dummy variable indicating if the firm was foreign, 
location variables, Age, and Size. The number of 
observations was 972; this included the 486 foreign 
subsidiaries as well as the 486 matched American 
firms. Positive coefficients indicate the variable 
is correlated with an increased number of labor 
lawsuit judgments; negative coefficients indicate 
the variable is correlated with a reduced number 
of labor lawsuit judgments. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Table 3. Negative binomial regression results 
for labor lawsuit judgments against U.S. and 
foreign firms 
Variable 
Federal 
State 
Constant 
-15.708 
-6.856 
(0.000) 
(-5.152)** 
Foreign 
0.984 
2.592 
(2.235)* 
(1.854)* 
Atlanta 
11.004 
0.478 
(0.000) 
(0.326) 
Chicago 
11.679 
1.151 
(0.000) 
(0.919) 
New York 
11.903 
2.318 
(0.000) 
(1.282) 
Age 
0.010 
0.004 
(0.680) 
(0.150) 
Size 
0.002 
0.002 
(3.968)** 
(1.954)* 
ALPHA 
8.195 
13.263 
(3.466)** 
(3.824)** 
Chi-square 
100.411 
200.218 
d.f. 
6 
6 
p-value 
0.000 
0.000 
N 
972 
972 
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 for one-tailed tests 
(t-statistic) 
The federal model tested federal labor law- 
suit judgments; the state model tested state labor 
lawsuit judgments. For both models the variable 
Foreign was significant in the predicted positive 
direction, indicating that foreign subsidiaries had 
significantly more labor lawsuit judgments even 
after controlling for location, age, and size. These 
results strongly support Hypothesis 1 at both the 
federal and state levels of jurisdiction, indicating 
that foreign subsidiaries operating in the U.S. do 
experience a liability of foreignness with respect to 
labor lawsuit judgments. Size was positive and sig- 
nificant, indicating that firms with more employees 
faced significantly more labor lawsuit judgments. 
Intuitively, more employees should increase the 
probability of facing a labor lawsuit. The chi- 
square 'goodness of fit' test for both models was 
highly significant. The location variables were not 
significant, suggesting that this liability is nation- 
wide. 
Table 4 reports Poisson regression results of a 
federal and a state model testing why some foreign 
subsidiaries may face fewer labor lawsuit judg- 
ments (Hypotheses 2-6). Statistical tests did not 
detect overdispersion in either model; accordingly, 
Poisson regression was used. The federal and state 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 

Labor Lawsuit Judgments as Liabilities of Foreignness 
Table 4. 
Poisson regression results for 
judgments against foreign subsidiaries 
labor lawsuit 
Variable 
Federal 
State 
Constant 
-2.819 
-2.980 
(-3.192)** 
(-2.767)** 
USHR 
-0.046 
1.377 
(-0.054) 
(1.310) 
HRPro 
1.419 
2.213 
(2.170)* 
(3.946)** 
USTopExec 
-0.700 
-1.096 
(-1.049) 
(-2.536)** 
ReportUS 
0.794 
-0.144 
(1.224) 
(-0.264) 
USOffices 
-0.053 
-0.042 
(-1.788)* 
(-2.236)* 
Age 
-0.006 
-0.041 
(-0.290) 
(-2.277)* 
Size 
0.002 
0.002 
(3.084)** 
(5.071)** 
Chi-square 
21.114 
87.575 
d.f. 
7 
7 
p-value 
0.004 
0.000 
N 
176 
176 
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 for one-tailed tests 
(t-statistic) 
models included a constant and controlled for Size. 
Some of the data to test these hypotheses came 
from a survey sent only to foreign subsidiaries; the 
sample size of 176 represents the number of usable 
responses to that survey. Results were consistent 
across both models, including chi-square 'good- 
ness of fit' tests, which were highly significant. 
Hypothesis 2 (USHR) tested if foreign sub- 
sidiaries using Americans to handle HR issues face 
fewer labor lawsuit judgments. At both the federal 
and state levels, USHR was not significant; this 
hypothesis was not supported. The nationality of 
the officer handling HR issues did not affect a for- 
eign subsidiary's exposure to labor lawsuit judg- 
ments. Although Americans may better understand 
U.S. culture and laws, this did not mitigate the 
disadvantage of foreign subsidiaries with respect 
to labor lawsuit judgments. Understanding culture 
and law may be a necessary condition for identi- 
fying and implementing accepted practices, but it 
may not be sufficient. 
To test Hypotheses 3a and 3b, the dummy vari- 
able HRPro, indicating whether an HR profes- 
sional was in charge of HR issues, was used. 
Hypothesis 3a predicted a negative effect for this 
variable, while Hypothesis 3b predicted a posi- 
tive effect. For both the federal and state models, 
HRPro was significant and positive, indicating that 
foreign subsidiaries using HR professionals actu- 
ally faced more labor lawsuit judgments. These 
results provide support for Hypothesis 3b and, con- 
sequently, its competing Hypothesis 3a was not 
supported. 
Hypothesis 4 (USTopExec) tested if foreign sub- 
sidiaries with American top officers faced fewer 
labor lawsuit judgments. Although USTopExec 
was not significant in the federal model, it was 
significant in the predicted negative direction in 
the state model. These mixed findings illustrate the 
importance of incorporating jurisdictional differ- 
ences into research designs (Abzug and Mezias, 
1993). Perhaps American top officers were more 
effective at reducing state-level labor lawsuit judg- 
ments because, unlike federal laws and statutes, 
state laws vary nationally. It seems that the benefits 
of American top officers are more likely to emerge 
in the less universalistic state legal environments. 
Hypothesis 5 (ReportUS) was not supported at 
the federal or state level. Autonomy, as measured 
by reporting requirements, had no significant effect 
on the number of labor lawsuit judgments. For my 
data, there is no indication that increased auton- 
omy helps foreign subsidiaries avoid labor lawsuit 
judgments. USOffices was significant in the pre- 
dicted negative direction in both the federal and 
state models, indicating strong support for Hypoth- 
esis 6: Foreign subsidiaries with more affiliated 
U.S. operations faced fewer labor lawsuit judg- 
ments. Hypothesis 7 received limited support. Age 
was significant and negative in the state model, 
indicating that older foreign subsidiaries faced 
fewer labor lawsuit judgments. However, Age was 
not significant at the federal level. As mentioned 
above, mixed findings illustrate the importance of 
incorporating jurisdictional differences (Abzug and 
Mezias, 1993). Lastly, the control variable Size 
was positive and significant in both models indi- 
cating that firms with more employees face more 
labor lawsuit judgments. 
Discussion 
Findings at both the federal and state levels indi- 
cate that foreign subsidiaries face more labor law- 
suit judgments than their domestic counterparts. 
Having documented this liability of foreignness, 
I take the next step by examining foreign sub- 
sidiaries' strategies and characteristics associated 
with reduced exposure to this liability. Based on 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
239 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 
(2002) 

240 
J. M. Mezias 
past literature, I predicted that this liability is 
largely a knowledge deficit with respect to under- 
standing legal and cultural norms and to identi- 
fying and implementing accepted HR practices. 
Thus, I argue that foreign subsidiaries should hire 
people with this knowledge. Only a third of the 
foreign subsidiaries surveyed had HR professionals 
on location; most had functional managers handle 
HR issues. American managers likely have a bet- 
ter understanding of legal and cultural norms, but 
the findings suggest that putting American func- 
tional managers in charge of HR is not sufficient to 
help foreign subsidiaries reduce labor lawsuit judg- 
ments. Given that HR professionals helped estab- 
lish accepted labor practices, I argued that mini- 
mizing labor problems and reducing labor lawsuit 
judgments may require that managers in charge 
of HR be professionally trained. Interestingly, for- 
eign subsidiaries with HR professionals on location 
actually faced more labor lawsuit judgments. 
There are two primary explanations for why 
foreign subsidiaries using HR professionals had 
more labor lawsuit judgments. First, it is possi- 
ble that HR professionals exacerbate labor prob- 
lems. However, evidence about their experience 
and network connections argues against this expla- 
nation. Alternatively, reverse causation is a plau- 
sible second explanation. That is, foreign sub- 
sidiaries wait until labor problems surface before 
hiring HR professionals. Although Rosenzweig 
and Nohria (1993) argued that the HR function 
requires the most local adaptation, Rosenzweig and 
Singh (1991) cautioned that adopting host-country 
practices depends heavily on the presence of a 
legal imperative. Labor lawsuit judgments provide 
a legal imperative. Although data on the timing of 
these hires was not available, which is a limita- 
tion of my study, follow-up phone calls revealed 
that several foreign subsidiaries with labor law- 
suit judgments only hired HR professionals after 
HR problems arose. This 'hire to put out the fire' 
explanation suggests that, in addition to nation- 
ality and professional training, the timing of for- 
eign subsidiary staffing strategies may be critical 
to reducing exposure to this liability. 
Another subsidiary strategy likely to affect expo- 
sure to labor lawsuit judgments is staffing of the 
top manager position. Reducing labor lawsuit judg- 
ments may require support and understanding of 
a leader with sufficient managerial discretion to 
adopt local practices, which may be contrary to 
those of the parent firm. A subsidiary's top officer 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
presumably has such discretion and limited support 
for Hypothesis 4 suggests that foreign subsidiaries 
benefit from having host country nationals as their 
top officers. Using American top officers was not 
associated with fewer federal-level labor lawsuit 
judgments; this suggests that perhaps expatriate top 
officers have less trouble complying with the more 
universalistic federal laws. However, the presence 
of an American top officer was associated with 
fewer labor lawsuit judgments at the state level, 
suggesting that the advantage of using American 
top officers emerged in the more idiosyncratic state 
legal environments. 
Aspects of the parent-subsidiary relationship 
could also affect exposure to this liability. In par- 
ticular, I tested if the level of reporting auton- 
omy was associated with fewer labor lawsuit judg- 
ments. Reporting to a U.S. headquarters, rather 
than directly to the home country headquarters, 
made no significant difference in the number of 
labor lawsuit judgments. One interpretation is that 
increased autonomy does not help foreign sub- 
sidiaries adopt local HR practices. However, it is 
also possible that a better measure of autonomy 
is needed. Operationalizing USReport as a binary 
variable may capture overall autonomy, but may 
miss subtleties of the reporting relationship that 
are relevant to labor issues. 
The findings that subsidiaries of MNEs with 
more affiliated U.S. operations were associated 
with fewer labor lawsuit judgments are consistent 
with an organizational learning argument (Argote 
et al., 1990; Cool et al., 1997): Knowledge about 
identifying and implementing successful HR prac- 
tices is transferred across affiliated operations help- 
ing all affiliated subsidiaries. These results suggest 
that foreign subsidiaries may engage in vicarious 
learning about handling labor problems. They are 
also consistent with the institutional argument that 
greater visibility results in increased vulnerability 
to normative pressure and greater care to demon- 
strate compliance. It is important to recognize a 
potential selection bias: From an ecological per- 
spective, firms encountering fewer problems are 
more likely to survive and expand. 
With respect to Age, limited support for Hypoth- 
esis 7 is consistent with a liability of newness 
(Stinchcombe, 1965). Age was associated with 
fewer state-level labor lawsuit judgments, but was 
not significant at the federal level. State laws 
vary, which may make direct experience in a 
specific state more critical to reducing state-level 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 

Labor Lawsuit Judgments as Liabilities of Foreignness 
lawsuit judgments. If Age better captures expe- 
riential learning at a specific location, then that 
may explain why it was associated with fewer 
state-level labor lawsuit judgments. Because fed- 
eral laws apply nationally, direct experience may 
be less critical at the federal level. Again, it is 
important to recognize a potential selection bias: 
From an ecological perspective, firms encounter- 
ing numerous labor lawsuit judgments are more 
likely to leave that location. 
CONCLUSIONS 
AND IMPLICATIONS 
This is one of the first studies that both documents 
a liability of foreignness and examines strategies 
designed to minimize its effects on foreign sub- 
sidiaries. It is part of an emerging research stream 
designed to broaden the scope of FDI research by 
specifically investigating host country disadvan- 
tages. I provide empirical evidence of a specific 
liability of foreignness: Foreign subsidiaries oper- 
ating in the U.S. are at a disadvantage with respect 
to labor lawsuit judgments. I investigate this liabil- 
ity at both the federal and state jurisdictional levels 
and across geographic regions to ensure a compre- 
hensive test of this liability. Further, since foreign 
subsidiaries settle or abandon most claims (Cler- 
mont and Eisenberg, 1996), investigating labor 
lawsuits brought to judgment is a conservative test 
of this liability. 
Understanding and responding to U.S. labor 
laws challenge all firms operating in the United 
States, but these findings indicate that it is espe- 
cially daunting for managers of foreign subsidia- 
ries. From this perspective, the relative ability of 
U.S. firms to avoid labor lawsuit judgments stems 
from decades of adjusting to civil rights legisla- 
tion and societal and cultural norms that permeate 
business practices. This experience and familiar- 
ity with norms make it easier for domestic firms 
to both identify and implement accepted HR prac- 
tices that help ensure compliance with labor laws. 
Foreign subsidiaries are relatively unfamiliar with 
U.S. cultural, social, and legal norms. They are 
also inexperienced in dealing with U.S. employees, 
the myriad of state and federal laws and regula- 
tions, and court-enforced labor rights. 
Endogenous factors can also affect the num- 
ber of labor lawsuit judgments foreign subsidiaries 
face. For example, MNEs producing locally may 
worry about local rivals appropriating their 
proprietary technology. Fear of appropriation may 
encourage foreign investors to use expatriates 
rather than host country nationals in key manage- 
rial positions. Regardless of intention, exclusive 
use of expatriates in managerial positions is likely 
to run afoul of U.S. labor laws that prohibit dis- 
crimination based on national origin. 
Entry mode decisions may indirectly affect labor 
relations at foreign subsidiaries. It is an open 
question as to whether acquisitions or greenfield 
investments would differentially affect exposure to 
labor lawsuit judgments. Conceptually, what about 
an acquisition might affect a foreigi subsidiary's 
exposure to legal liability? On the negative side, 
changing established HR practices of an acquired 
firm could lead to employee resentment and labor 
problems. Alternatively, there are at least three 
potentially positive effects from an acquisition: 
local information, host country managerial expe- 
rience, and embeddedness in local systems. The 
information issue is problematic despite the fact 
that acquired firms presumably have greater local 
information than foreign acquirers do. As Shaver 
et al. (1997: 814) cautioned, 'the ultimate respon- 
sibility for decision-making and implementation 
falls on the investing firm's managers who have 
an incomplete understanding of the host nation 
operating environment.' Host country experience 
and local embeddedness may be more promising 
positive effects from acquisition because foreign 
investors may benefit from the experience and net- 
work connections of local managers staying with 
the acquired firm. The complexity of these effects, 
and the fact that not all occur with every acquisi- 
tion, suggest the need to develop the more direct 
measures I employed in this study. Indeed, investi- 
gating nationality and professional training of key 
managers, autonomy, the number of affiliated host 
country operations, and age more directly assesses 
labor lawsuit exposure than a dummy variable indi- 
cating entry mode decision can. These more direct 
measures better capture variance with respect to 
this particular liability and reduce the potential for 
spurious findings. Additionally, the findings with 
respect to these variables provide some evidence 
of which strategies and characteristics are associ- 
ated with reduced exposure to labor lawsuit judg- 
ments. Entry mode decisions affect many aspects 
of foreign subsidiary performance, but are made 
for many reasons. To fully investigate this com- 
plex relationship is beyond the scope of this study, 
but future researchers should investigate how entry 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
241 
Strat. Mgnmt. J., 23: 229-244 
(2002) 

242 
J. M. Mezias 
mode decisions affect specific liabilities of foreign- 
ness. 
Overall, these results have several implications 
for expatriate managers. Foreign subsidiaries 
should recognize managing U.S. employees as 
an important challenge and adjust their strategies 
accordingly. These findings suggest that incor- 
porating U.S. executives in decision making can 
reduce a foreign subsidiary's exposure to this dis- 
advantage. Additionally, subsidiaries should utilize 
affiliated operations as resources to help guide 
them in identifying and implementing U.S. accept- 
ed practices. They could transfer experienced em- 
ployees across affiliated operations to more effec- 
tively deal with labor problems. 
A lack of embeddedness in local systems may 
contribute to liabilities of foreignness. Embedded- 
ness facilitates information spillovers and vicari- 
ous learning, which may be especially important 
for those unfamiliar with host country social, cul- 
tural, and legal norms. Early efforts to 'plug-in' 
to local systems could help foreign subsidiaries 
gain knowledge and legitimacy and appear less for- 
eign. Foreign managers that join trade or industry 
groups, expatriate organizations, and attend profes- 
sional conferences may benefit from information 
spillovers and vicarious learning. Other activities, 
such as sponsoring local charities, may also help 
foreign subsidiaries enhance their reputations, gain 
legitimacy, and appear less foreign. While these 
activities may not directly reduce exposure to lia- 
bilities of foreignness, they may provide useful 
information and learning opportunities and create 
positive perceptions that may indirectly help min- 
imize exposure. 
My study provides foreign investors with a rudi- 
mentary guideline for deciding when to choose 
local adaptation over maintaining parent firm prac- 
tices. When operating in host countries with pow- 
erful institutions, such as the U.S. courts, foreign 
subsidiaries are under greater pressure to comply 
and face higher costs of noncompliance. In such 
environments, subsidiaries identifying and imple- 
menting host country practices increase their legit- 
imacy and reduce their exposure to liabilities of 
foreignness. The problem is that these practices are 
often tacit, culture-based understandings, which 
may not be easily detected or implemented by for- 
eign managers. 
Although my research focuses on a liability of 
foreignness with respect to labor lawsuit judg- 
ments, foreign subsidiaries operating in the U.S. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
could suffer liabilities in other legal areas as well 
as in areas not related to law. Many liabilities 
stem from difficulties in understanding the more 
tacit aspects of cultural and social norms, which 
vary by country. Given the idiosyncratic nature of 
liabilities of foreignness, developing a theory of 
liabilities of foreignness requires that researchers 
identify specific liabilities in different countries. 
It also requires taking the next step to investigate 
strategies that may minimize the effects of these 
liabilities. This next step increases our understand- 
ing of a specific liability, sheds light on frame- 
works investigating liabilities of foreignness, and 
is informative to managers of MNEs. 
My study provides a framework for identifying 
liabilities of foreignness and investigating strate- 
gies that reduce exposure to them. Key subsidiary 
staffing strategies, parental experience and com- 
mitment in the host country, and direct subsidiary 
experience are all likely to affect exposure to most 
liabilities of foreignness. The timing of implement- 
ing liability-reducing strategies may also be crit- 
ical. Unfortunately, the cross-sectional nature of 
my data is a limitation in trying to investigate the 
issue of timing. Identifying when liability-reducing 
strategies are implemented and utilizing longitu- 
dinal data could help us better understand mech- 
anisms affecting liabilities of foreignness. Future 
research could overcome this limitation by using 
longitudinal data to investigate when foreign sub- 
sidiaries hire HR professionals. This would help to 
determine if HR professionals hired from the start 
reduce labor lawsuit exposure or if HR profession- 
als hired after labor problems arise succeed in min- 
imizing current and future labor problems. In gen- 
eral, using a longitudinal design could help better 
identify mechanisms and processes foreign firms 
use to learn and overcome liabilities of foreign- 
ness. Another possible limitation of my study is the 
use of a global measure of subsidiary autonomy. 
Rather than measuring the general level of auton- 
omy, future researchers should measure autonomy 
related to the specific liability of foreignness, e.g., 
autonomy with respect to labor issues. 
Researchers investigating any liabilities of for- 
eignness should examine different dimensions of 
each liability (e.g., federal and state levels), sample 
in several regions, and carefully consider control 
variables. For my study, measuring size as the 
number of employees was most relevant. However, 
my data were not disaggregated into expatriates 
and host country nationals. Future research might 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 

Labor Lawsuit Judgments as Liabilities of Foreignness 
try to investigate how the ratio of expatriates to 
host country national employees affects exposure 
to liabilities of foreignness. 
As more firms engage in FDI, research designed 
to improve our understanding of the liabilities 
of foreignness becomes more critical. The pre- 
dominate focus of FDI research has been inves- 
tigating sources and types of advantages foreign 
subsidiaries must possess to operate successfully 
abroad and overcome whatever local disadvan- 
tages they may encounter. While these advantages 
strongly determine performance, minimizing lia- 
bilities of foreignness facing foreign subsidiaries 
also affects subsidiary performance. Better under- 
standing of specific liabilities of foreignness can 
uncover ways to minimize exposure to these dis- 
advantages and thus improve the management of 
FDI. These research streams are important and 
complementary, but the paucity of research inves- 
tigating disadvantages limits efforts to improve our 
understanding of a range of important factors that 
affect the success of FDI. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I appreciate helpful comments from Rikki Abzug, 
John Bradford, Samuel Craig, John Daniels, 
William Greene, William Guth, Jeffrey Kerr, Andy 
King, Xavier Martin, Stephen Mezias, Patricia 
Robinson, Darryl Salas, and especially Myles 
Shaver. I would also like to thank Professor Will 
Mitchell and two anonymous reviewers for their 
insights and helpful comments. Participants at the 
Institutions, Conflict, and Change Workshop at 
Northwestern University and the South Florida 
International Business Research Seminar also pro- 
vided helpful feedback on an earlier draft. A Uni- 
versity of Miami School of Business Administra- 
tion Summer Research Support Grant helped sup- 
port this research. 
REFERENCES 
Abzug R, Mezias SJ. 1993. The fragmented state and 
due process protection in organizations: the case of 
comparable worth. Organization Science 4: 433-435. 
Anand J, Kogut B. 1997. Technological capabilities 
of 
countries, firm rivalry and foreign direct 
investment. Journal of International Business Studies 
28: 445-465. 
Andrews KR. 1971. The Concept of Corporate Strategy. 
Dow Jones-Irwin: New York. 
Argote L, Beckman SL, Epple D. 1990. The persistence 
and transfer of learning in industrial settings. 
Management Science 36: 140-154. 
Baron JN, Dobbin FR, Jennings PD. 1986. War and peace: 
the evolution of moder personnel administration. 
American Journal of Sociology 92: 350-383. 
Barnard CI. 1938. The Functions of the Executive. 
Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA. 
Bartlett CA, Ghoshal S. 1989. Managing Across Borders. 
Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA. 
Baum JAC. 1996. Organizational ecology. In Handbook 
of Organizational Studies, Clegg SR, Hardy C, 
Nord W (eds). Sage: London; 77-114. 
British-American Chamber of Commerce. 1995. The 
UK/USA Directory: A Directory of Bilateral Invest- 
ment. British-American Chamber of Commerce: New 
York. 
Caves RE. 1971. International corporations: the industrial 
economics of foreign investment. Economica 38(149): 
1-27. 
Clermont KM, Eisenberg T. 1996. Commentary: xeno- 
philia in American courts. Harvard Law Review 
109(5): 1120-1143. 
Cool KO, Dierickx I, Szulanski G. 1997. Diffusion of 
innovations within organizations: electronic switching 
in the Bell system, 1971-1982. Organization Science 
8: 543-557. 
DiMaggio PJ, Powell WW. 1983. The iron cage revisited: 
institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in 
organizational fields. American Sociological Review 
48: 47-160. 
Donohue J, Siegelman P. 1991. The changing nature of 
employment discrimination litigation. Stanford Law 
Review 43: 983-1000. 
Dunlop JT, Harbison HH, Kerr C, Meyer CA. 1975. 
Industrialism and Industrial Man Reconsidered. Inter- 
University Study of Labor Problems in Economic 
Development: Princeton, NJ. 
Edelman LB. 1990. Legal environments and organiza- 
tional governance: the expansion of due process in the 
American workplace. American Journal of Sociology 
95: 1401-1440. 
Edelman LB. 1992. Legal ambiguity and symbolic 
structures: organizational mediation of civil rights law. 
American Journal of Sociology 97: 1531-1576. 
Edelman LB, Suchman MC. 1997. The legal environ- 
ments of organizations. Annual Review of Sociology 
23: 479-515. 
Edwards R. 1994. Reshaping employee protections for a 
global economy. Challenge 37: 34-39. 
Evans P, Doz YL. 
1989. The dualistic organiza- 
tion. In Human Resource Management in Interna- 
tional Firms: Change, Globalization, and Innovation, 
Evans P, Doz Y, Laurent A (eds). Macmillan: Lon- 
don; 219-242. 
Ewing DW. 1982. Due process: will business default? 
Harvard Business Review 60(6): 114-122. 
Fayerweather J. 1969. International Business Manage- 
ment: A Conceptual Framework. McGraw-Hill: New 
York. 
Finn MT (ed.). 1996. The American Bench: Judges of the 
Nation. Forster-Long: Sacramento, CA. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
243 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 

244 
J. M. Mezias 
German American Chamber of Commerce. 1996. 
Subsidiaries of German Firms in the US1996/97. 
GACC: New York. 
Greene WH. 1989. LIMDEP. Econometric Software: 
New York. 
Greenwood M, Yule GU. 1920. An inquiry into the 
nature of frequency distributions of multiple hap- 
penings, with particular reference to the occurrence 
of multiple attacks of disease or repeated accidents. 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 83: 
255-279. 
Hambrick DC. 1989. Guest editor's introduction: putting 
top managers back in the strategic picture. Strategic 
Management Journal, Summer Special Issue 10: 
5-15. 
Hambrick DC, Mason PA. 1984. Upper echelons: the 
organization as a reflection of its top managers. 
Academy 
of 
Management 
Review 
9: 
193-206. 
Hennart J, Park Y. 1994. Location, governance, and 
strategic determinants of Japanese manufacturing 
investment in the United States. Strategic Management 
Journal 15(6): 419-436. 
Hymer SH. 1976. The International Operations of 
National Firms: A Study of Direct Foreign Investment. 
MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 
Japan External Trade Organization.. 1997. The Directory 
of Japanese Affiliated Companies in the USA 
and Canada 1997-1998. 
Japan External Trade 
Organization: Tokyo. 
Kerr C, Dunlop JT, Harbison HH, Meyer CA. 1960. 
Industrialism and Industrial Man. Harvard University 
Press: Boston, MA. 
Kindleberger CP. 1969. American Business Abroad: Six 
Lectures on Direct Investment. Yale University Press: 
New Haven, CT. 
Kogut B, Chang SJ. 1991. Technological capabilities and 
Japanese foreign direct investment in the United 
States. Review of Economics and Statistics 73: 
401-413. 
Lipsey RE. 1994. Foreign-owned firms and US wages. 
Working paper 4927, National Bureau of Economic 
Research. 
Maddala GS. 1984. Limited Dependent and Qualitative 
Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge University 
Press: Cambridge, U.K. 
Meyer JW, Rowan B. 1977. Institutional organizations: 
formal structure as myth and ceremony. American 
Journal of Sociology 83: 343-363. 
Mezias JM. 1999. Labor lawsuits: a source of disadvan- 
tage for foreign subsidiaries in the United States. Doc- 
toral dissertation, New York University. 
Mezias JM. 2000. Do labor lawsuits represent a liability 
of foreignness for foreign subsidiaries operating in the 
United States? In Best Paper Proceedings, Academy of 
Management Meeting: Toronto. 
Mezias JM, Mezias SJ. 2000. Resource partitioning, 
the foundation of specialist firms and innovation: 
the American feature film industry, 1912-1929. 
Organization Science 11: 306-322. 
Mincer J, Higuchi M. 1988. Wage structures and labour 
turnover in the US and Japan. Journal of the Japanese 
and International Economies 2: 97-133. 
Miner AS, Mezias SJ. 1996. Ugly ducklings no more: 
pasts and futures of organizational learning research. 
Organization Science 7: 88-99. 
Nye D. 1995. When the fired fight back. Across the Board 
32(6): 31-34. 
Payson MF, Rosen PB. 1991. Playing by fair rules. HR 
Magazine 36(4): 42-43. 
Prahalad CK, Doz YL. 1987. The Multinational Mission: 
Balancing Local Demands and Global Visions. Free 
Press: New York. 
Ranger-Moore J, Banaszak-Holl J, Hannan MT. 1989. 
Effects of density and environmental conditions on 
founding rates of financial institutions. Technical 
Report 89-3, Department of Sociology, Cornell 
University: Ithaca, NY. 
Ranger-Moore J, Banaszak-Holl J, Hannan MT. 1991. 
Density-dependent dynamics in regulated industries: 
founding rates of banks and life insurance companies. 
Administrative Science Quarterly 36: 36-65. 
Rosenzweig PM, Nohria N. 1993. Influences on human 
resource management practices in multinational 
corporations. Journal of International Business Studies 
26: 229-251. 
Rosenzweig PM, Singh JV. 1991. Organizational envi- 
ronments and the multinational enterprise. Academy 
of Management Review 16: 340-361. 
Scott WR. 1983. The organization of environments: 
networks, culture, and historical elements. In 
Organizational Environments: Rituals and Rationality, 
Meyer JW, Scott WR (eds). Sage: Beverly Hills, CA; 
155-175. 
Scott WR, Meyer JW. 1983. The organization of societal 
sectors. In Organizational Environments: Rituals 
and Rationality, Meyer JW, Scott WR (eds). Sage: 
Beverly Hills, CA; 129-153. 
Shaver JM. 1998. Do foreign-owned and US-owned 
establishments exhibit the same location pattern 
in American manufacturing industries? Journal of 
International Business Studies 29: 469-491. 
Shaver JM, Mitchell W, Yeung B. 1997. The effect of 
own-firm and other-firm experience on foreign direct 
investment survival in the United States, 1987-92. 
Strategic Management Journal 18(10): 811-824. 
Stinchcombe AL. 1965. Social structures in organiza- 
tions. In Handbook of Organizations, March JG (ed.). 
Rand-McNally: Chicago; 153-193. 
Vernon R. 1977. Storm over the Multinational: The Real 
Issues. Harvard University Press: Boston, MA. 
Wang P, Cockbur IM, Puterman ML. 1998. Analysis 
of patent data: a mixed Poisson regression model 
approach. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 
16: 27-41. 
Zaheer S. 1995. Overcoming the liability of foreignness. 
Academy of Management Journal 38: 341-363. 
Zucker LG, Darby MR, Armstrong J. 1998. Geographi- 
cally localized knowledge: spillovers or markets? Eco- 
nomic Inquiry 36: 65-86. 
Copyright ? 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Strat. Mgmt. J., 23: 229-244 (2002) 
